 Addis Agenda Paras 3-19

3.	We recognize that, since the adoption of the Monterrey Consensus, the world has made significant overall progress. Globally, economic activity and financing flows have increased substantially. We have made great progress in mobilizing financial and technical resources for development from an increased number of actors. Advances in science, technology and innovation have enhanced the potential to achieve our development goals. Many countries, including developing countries, have implemented policy frameworks that have contributed to increased mobilization of domestic resources and higher levels of economic growth and social progress. Developing countries’ share in world trade has increased and, while debt burdens remain, they have been reduced in many poor countries. These advances have contributed to a substantial reduction in the number of people living in extreme poverty and to notable progress towards the achievement of the Millennium Development Goals.
4.	Despite these gains, many countries, particularly developing countries, still face considerable challenges, and some have fallen further behind. Inequalities within many countries have increased dramatically. Women, representing half of the world’s population, as well as indigenous peoples and the vulnerable, continue to be excluded from participating fully in the economy. While the Monterrey agenda has not yet been fully implemented, new challenges have arisen and enormous unmet needs remain for the achievement of sustainable development. The 2008 world financial and economic crisis exposed risks and vulnerabilities in the international financial and economic system. Global growth rates are now below pre-crisis levels. Shocks from financial and economic crises, conflict, natural disasters and disease outbreaks spread rapidly in our highly interconnected world. Environmental degradation, climate change and other environmental risks threaten to undermine past successes and future prospects. We need to ensure that our development efforts enhance resilience in the face of these threats.
5.	Solutions can be found, including through strengthening public policies, regulatory frameworks and finance at all levels, unlocking the transformative potential of people and the private sector and incentivizing changes in financing as well as consumption and production patterns to support sustainable development. We recognize that appropriate incentives, strengthening national and international policy environments and regulatory frameworks and their coherence, harnessing the potential of science, technology and innovation, closing technology gaps and scaling up capacity-building at all levels are essential for the shift towards sustainable development and poverty eradication. We reaffirm the importance of freedom, human rights and national sovereignty, good governance, the rule of law, peace and security, combating corruption at all levels and in all its forms and effective, accountable and inclusive democratic institutions at the subnational, national and international levels as central to enabling the effective, efficient and transparent mobilization and use of resources. We also reaffirm all the principles of the Rio Declaration on Environment and Development.
6.	We reaffirm that achieving gender equality, empowering all women and girls, and the full realization of their human rights are essential to achieving sustained, inclusive and equitable economic growth and sustainable development. We reiterate the need for gender mainstreaming, including targeted actions and investments in the formulation and implementation of all financial, economic, environmental and social policies. We recommit to adopting and strengthening sound policies and enforceable legislation and transformative actions for the promotion of gender equality and women’s and girls’ empowerment at all levels, to ensure women’s equal rights, access and opportunities for participation and leadership in the economy and to eliminate gender-based violence and discrimination in all its forms. 
7.	We recognize that investing in children and youth is critical to achieving inclusive, equitable and sustainable development for present and future generations, and we recognize the need to support countries that face particular challenges to make the requisite investments in this area. We reaffirm the vital importance of‎ promoting and protecting the rights of all children and ensuring that no child is left behind.
8.	We recognize the importance of addressing the diverse needs and challenges faced by countries in special situations, in particular African countries, least developed countries, landlocked developing countries and small island developing States, as well as the specific challenges facing middle-income countries. We reaffirm that least developed countries, as the most vulnerable group of countries, need enhanced global support to overcome the structural challenges they face for the achievement of the post‑2015 development agenda and the sustainable development goals. We reaffirm the need to address the special challenges and needs of landlocked developing countries in structurally transforming their economies, harnessing benefits from international trade and developing efficient transport and transit systems. We further reaffirm that small island developing States remain a special case for sustainable development in view of their small size, remoteness, narrow resource and export base and exposure to global environmental challenges. We also reaffirm the need to achieve a positive socioeconomic transformation in Africa and the need to address the diverse and specific development needs of middle-income countries, including combating poverty in all of its forms. In this regard, we support the implementation of relevant strategies and programmes of action, including the Istanbul Declaration and Programme of Action, the SIDS Accelerated Modalities of Action (SAMOA) Pathway and the Vienna Programme of Action for Landlocked Developing Countries for the Decade 2014–2024, and reaffirm the importance of supporting the new development framework, the African Union’s Agenda 2063, as well as its 10‑year plan of action, as a strategic framework for ensuring a positive socioeconomic transformation in Africa within the next 50 years, and its continental programme embedded in the resolutions of the General Assembly on the New Partnership for Africa’s Development (NEPAD). Countries in conflict and post-conflict situations also need special attention. We recognize the development challenge posed by conflict, which not only impedes but can reverse decades of development gains. We recognize the peacebuilding financing gap and the importance of the Peacebuilding Fund. We take note of the principles set out in the New Deal by the Group of Seven Plus, countries that are, or have been, affected by conflict.
9.	Cohesive nationally owned sustainable development strategies, supported by integrated national financing frameworks, will be at the heart of our efforts. We reiterate that each country has primary responsibility for its own economic and social development and that the role of national policies and development strategies cannot be overemphasized. We will respect each country’s policy space and leadership to implement policies for poverty eradication and sustainable development, while remaining consistent with relevant international rules and commitments. At the same time, national development efforts need to be supported by an enabling international economic environment, including coherent and mutually supporting world trade, monetary and financial systems and strengthened and enhanced global economic governance. Processes to develop and facilitate the availability of appropriate knowledge and technologies globally, as well as capacity-building, are also critical. We commit to pursuing policy coherence and an enabling environment for sustainable development at all levels and by all actors and to reinvigorating the global partnership for sustainable development.
10.	The enhanced and revitalized global partnership for sustainable development, led by Governments, will be a vehicle for strengthening international cooperation for implementation of the post‑2015 development agenda. Multi-stakeholder partnerships and the resources, knowledge and ingenuity of the private sector, civil society, the scientific community, academia, philanthropy and foundations, parliaments, local authorities, volunteers and other stakeholders will be important to mobilize and share knowledge, expertise, technology and financial resources, complement the efforts of Governments and support the achievement of the sustainable development goals, in particular in developing countries. This global partnership should reflect the fact that the post‑2015 development agenda, including the sustainable development goals, is global in nature and universally applicable to all countries while taking into account different national realities, capacities, needs and levels of development and respecting national policies and priorities. We will work with all partners to ensure a sustainable, equitable, inclusive, peaceful and prosperous future for all. We will all be held accountable by future generations for the success and delivery of commitments we make today.
11.	Achieving an ambitious post‑2015 development agenda, including all the sustainable development goals, will require an equally ambitious, comprehensive, holistic and transformative approach with respect to the means of implementation, combining different means of implementation and integrating the economic, social and environmental dimensions of sustainable development. This should be underpinned by effective, accountable and inclusive institutions, sound policies and good governance at all levels. We will identify actions and address critical gaps relevant to the post‑2015 development agenda, including the sustainable development goals, with an aim to harness their considerable synergies, so that implementation of one will contribute to the progress of others. We have therefore identified a range of cross-cutting areas that build on these synergies.
12.	Delivering social protection and essential public services for all. To end poverty in all its forms everywhere and finish the unfinished business of the Millennium Development Goals, we commit to a new social compact. In this effort, we will provide fiscally sustainable and nationally appropriate social protection systems and measures for all, including floors, with a focus on those furthest below the poverty line and the vulnerable, persons with disabilities, indigenous persons, children, youth and older persons. We also encourage countries to consider setting nationally appropriate spending targets for quality investments in essential public services for all, including health, education, energy, water and sanitation, consistent with national sustainable development strategies. We will make every effort to meet the needs of all communities through delivering high-quality services that make effective use of resources. We commit to strong international support for these efforts and will explore coherent funding modalities to mobilize additional resources, building on country-led experiences.
13.	Scaling up efforts to end hunger and malnutrition. It is unacceptable that close to 800 million people are chronically undernourished and do not have access to sufficient, safe and nutritious food. With the majority of the poor living in rural areas, we emphasize the need to revitalize the agricultural sector, promote rural development and ensure food security, notably in developing countries, in a sustainable manner, which will lead to rich payoffs across the sustainable development goals. We will support sustainable agriculture, including forestry, fisheries and pastoralism. We will also take action to fight malnutrition and hunger among the urban poor. Recognizing the enormous investment needs in these areas, we encourage increased public and private investments. In this regard, we recognize the Committee on World Food Security’s voluntary Principles for Responsible Investment in Agriculture and Food Systems and the Voluntary Guidelines on the Responsible Governance of Tenure of Land, Fisheries and Forests in the Context of National Food Security. We recognize the efforts of the International Fund for Agricultural Development in mobilizing investment to enable rural people living in poverty to improve their food security and nutrition, raise their incomes and strengthen their resilience. We value the work of the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO), the World Food Programme and the World Bank and other multilateral development banks. We also recognize the complementary role of social safety nets in ensuring food security and nutrition. In this regard, we welcome the Rome Declaration on Nutrition and the Framework for Action, which can provide policy options and strategies aimed at ensuring food security and nutrition for all. We also commit to increasing public investment, which plays a strategic role in financing research, infrastructure and pro-poor initiatives. We will strengthen our efforts to enhance food security and nutrition and focus our efforts on smallholders and women farmers, as well as on agricultural cooperatives and farmers’ networks. We call upon relevant agencies to further coordinate and collaborate in this regard, in accordance with their respective mandates. These efforts must be supported by improving access to markets, enabling domestic and international environments and strengthened collaboration across the many initiatives in this area, including regional initiatives, such as the Comprehensive Africa Agriculture Development Programme. We will also work to significantly reduce post-harvest food loss and waste.
14.	Establishing a new forum to bridge the infrastructure gap. Investing in sustainable and resilient infrastructure, including transport, energy, water and sanitation for all, is a pre-requisite for achieving many of our goals. To bridge the global infrastructure gap, including the $1 trillion to $1.5 trillion annual gap in developing countries, we will facilitate development of sustainable, accessible and resilient quality infrastructure in developing countries through enhanced financial and technical support. We welcome the launch of new infrastructure initiatives aimed at bridging these gaps, including the Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank, the Global Infrastructure Hub, the New Development Bank, the Asia Pacific Project Preparation Facility, the World Bank Group’s Global Infrastructure Facility and the Africa50 Infrastructure Fund, as well as the increase in the capital of the Inter‑American Investment Corporation. As a key pillar to meet the sustainable development goals, we call for the establishment of a global infrastructure forum building on existing multilateral collaboration mechanisms, led by the multilateral development banks. This forum will meet periodically to improve alignment and coordination among established and new infrastructure initiatives, multilateral and national development banks, United Nations agencies and national institutions, development partners and the private sector. It will encourage a greater range of voices to be heard, particularly from developing countries, to identify and address infrastructure and capacity gaps in particular in least developed countries, landlocked developing countries, small island developing States and African countries. It will highlight opportunities for investment and cooperation and work to ensure that investments are environmentally, socially and economically sustainable.
15.	Promoting inclusive and sustainable industrialization. We stress the critical importance of industrial development for developing countries, as a critical source of economic growth, economic diversification and value addition. We will invest in promoting inclusive and sustainable industrial development to effectively address major challenges such as growth and jobs, resources and energy efficiency, pollution and climate change, knowledge-sharing, innovation and social inclusion. In this regard, we welcome relevant cooperation within the United Nations system, including the United Nations Industrial Development Organization (UNIDO), to advance the linkages between infrastructure development, inclusive and sustainable industrialization and innovation.
16.	Generating full and productive employment and decent work for all and promoting micro, small and medium-sized enterprises. To enable all people to benefit from growth, we will include full and productive employment and decent work for all as a central objective in our national development strategies. We will encourage the full and equal participation of women and men, including persons with disabilities, in the formal labour market. We note that micro, small and medium-sized enterprises, which create the vast majority of jobs in many countries, often lack access to finance. Working with private actors and development banks, we commit to promoting appropriate, affordable and stable access to credit to micro, small and medium-sized enterprises, as well as adequate skills development training for all, particularly for youth and entrepreneurs. We will promote national youth strategies as a key instrument for meeting the needs and aspirations of young people. We also commit to developing and operationalizing, by 2020, a global strategy for youth employment and implementing the International Labour Organization (ILO) Global Jobs Pact.
17.	Protecting our ecosystems for all. All of our actions need to be underpinned by our strong commitment to protect and preserve our planet and natural resources, our biodiversity and our climate. We commit to coherent policy, financing, trade and technology frameworks to protect, manage and restore our ecosystems, including marine and terrestrial ecosystems, and to promote their sustainable use, build resilience, reduce pollution and combat climate change, desertification and land degradation. We recognize the importance of avoiding harmful activities. Governments, businesses and households will all need to change behaviours, with a view to ensuring sustainable consumption and production patterns. We will promote corporate sustainability, including reporting on environmental, social and governance impacts, to help to ensure transparency and accountability. Public and private investments in innovations and clean technologies will be needed, while keeping in mind that new technologies will not substitute for efforts to reduce waste or efficiently use natural resources.
18.	Promoting peaceful and inclusive societies. We underline the need to promote peaceful and inclusive societies for achieving sustainable development and to build effective, accountable and inclusive institutions at all levels. Good governance, the rule of law, human rights, fundamental freedoms, equal access to fair justice systems and measures to combat corruption and curb illicit financial flows will be integral to our efforts.
19.	The post‑2015 development agenda, including the sustainable development goals, can be met within the framework of a revitalized global partnership for sustainable development, supported by the concrete policies and actions as outlined in the present Action Agenda.


2018 FSDR - Chapter 2
Chapter II. Financing investment in selected SDGs
1. Overview
The Addis Ababa Action Agenda calls for increased investment in sustainable and resilient infrastructure, including for energy, water and sanitation for all, as prerequisites for achieving the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs). Closing the global infrastructure gap has become a major priority for the international community. Several new initiatives have been launched, including the Global Infrastructure Forum called for in the Addis Agenda, other infrastructure platforms and facilities, and new development banks and finance institutions. Yet, major challenges remain to scale up SDG investments in infrastructure and beyond. To support countries in this effort, this chapter examines the financing challenges in the SDGs under in-depth review at the 2018 United Nations High-level Political Forum on Sustainable Development, namely: SDGs 6 (water and sanitation), 7 (affordable and clean energy), 11 (sustainable cities and communities), 12 (sustainable production and consumption patterns) and 15 (terrestrial ecosystems). 
While the financing models for each of these SDGs draws on all seven chapters of the Addis Agenda, a key question underlying many of the international debates is what roles public, private and blended financing should play. The Addis Agenda stresses that all sources of financing are needed, and that they are complementary, with different objectives and characteristics making them more or less suitable in different contexts and sectors. The Addis Agenda also underlines the potential of blended finance instruments, while calling for careful consideration of their appropriate structure and use. 
Because the sectors covered in this chapter in large part address public services and goods, national and sub-national public authorities are ultimately responsible for service delivery. Public policies and actions must thus be the driving force. An examination of the SDG sectors under review highlighted several policy priorities. These include: 
• Enhancing institutional and regulatory frameworks: Strong institutions and the rule of law are the starting point for effective economic governance. They need to be coupled with transparent, consistent and quality regulatory frameworks to guide private operators in each sector, manage natural monopolies, encourage innovation, limit red tape, and promote universal access to infrastructure services. Without this enabling environment, investment risks will remain particularly high, and neither public nor private financing or operation is likely to satisfy public need in a cost-efficient manner. A stable international macroeconomic environment is also required to support sustainable long-term investments in the targeted sectors (chapter III.F). 
• Developing infrastructure plans: Plans should integrate financing frameworks and align with country development strategies. They should provide a long-term vision (beyond the political cycle), include adequate stakeholder consultations, and incorporate climate impact and resilience as well as gender assessments. They should also serve to coordinate across sectors, given synergies and interconnections (e.g. hydro-power plants impact energy, water and ecosystems).
• Translating plans into quality project pipelines: This calls for sufficient human and financial resources, adequately prepared projects, and effective procurement and frameworks for public-private partnerships (PPP) as applicable. In this context, governments can benefit from multilateral development bank platforms that support the development of replicable and scalable infrastructure projects, such as SOURCE and the Global Infrastructure Facility (GIF). 
• Strengthening public finance: Equity, social inclusion, and other public good considerations provide a rationale for public engagement through direct financing, subsidies, guarantees or other incentives, and/or regulation. However, in many countries, public balance sheets and fiscal space are constrained, and debt sustainability is a major concern. This underscores the need for boosting public financial resources, both domestically largely through improved taxation, and internationally through official development assistance (ODA). South-South cooperation and other official development finance can play complementary roles (Chapters III.A, III.C, and III.E).
• Mobilizing the private sector: The private sector may be involved in the ownership, operation and finance of projects, depending on country and sector priorities (with most deals focused on finance or operation, and not on privatization per se). While the private sector can bring cost-efficient solutions, it is also often associated with higher financing costs because most investors demand a competitive return for the risk they assume. To effectively contribute to many SDGs, private financing flows need to be stable and long-term oriented (chapter III.B).
• Getting prices right: Where socially feasible, price signals can address externalities (“polluter pays principle”) and support sustainable consumption and production patterns, for example through carbon pricing or phasing out harmful subsidies, taking fully into account the specific needs and conditions of developing countries and minimizing possible adverse impacts on their development in a manner that protects the poor and the affected communities, as called for in the Addis Agenda. 
• Strengthening International Cooperation: Developing countries need significant capacity building support to make progress in these areas and create institutions capable of delivering the ambitious SDG agenda (chapter III.C). 
These policy priorities can guide stakeholders as they scale up SDG financing. Previous IATF reports have also highlighted several factors to consider in determining combinations of private and public ownership, operation and financing of projects, including: (i) whether investments can be sufficiently profitable to compensate private investors for the risks they bear; (ii) whether investments produce goods or services that can be effectively supplied by the market, or whether they have public-good properties (including positive or negative externalities) that require public involvement; (iii) more specifically, whether public intervention is warranted for social equity reasons; and (iv) whether private investors can bring efficiency gains through the profit incentive. 
For example, investments in ecosystems will largely be publicly financed due to the public good nature of the sector, though private initiatives sometimes play a role, often through philanthropy or impact investing (chapter III.B). Private financing is most likely to be appropriate in sectors where projects can generate sufficient returns, such as in the energy sector, though with public oversight and often public support. The use of private finance is more challenging in areas where equity considerations and large financing gaps reduce profit prospects, such as water where various financing models have been utilized (see Figure 1, which provides a rough breakdown of the roles of public and private financing across sectors, each of which depends on an overall enabling environment). 
Figure 1: Continuum of public and private finance

As noted above, the domestic and international enabling environments are critical factors for investment. When the perceived risk of project failure is high, the cost of private finance, in particular, is likely to be prohibitive. Financing strategies need to consider how to avoid locking in high financial costs that reflect domestic risks for the entire duration of infrastructure projects (often 20 years or more). This is particularly relevant for countries that are in the process of strengthening institutions and thus reducing risks. Development banks could assist countries in building such financing strategies. This also underscores the importance of public finance, either through direct financing or blending strategies (chapter III.C). However, blended strategies can also create contingent liabilities that need to be carefully managed (chapter III.E). 
The scale of financing in these sectors requires mobilizing both domestic and international sources. International financing is often a critical complement to domestic resources, but might generate currency risks that are difficult to manage at a country level. This calls for examining whether global approaches allowing the diversification of currency risks could be developed, for instance by development banks. 
To examine how public and private firms can contribute in the sectors under review, it is also important to better understand the sources of cash flows to maintain operations and cover financing costs. They can come from three main sources: users (tariffs), public authorities (taxes) and transfers from national to sub-national governments or from external partners (see Table 1). These sources of cash-flow provide the basis to mobilize repayable finance, including concessional and non-concessional finance, necessary to realize the required investments in these sectors. Table 1 lists examples of these different financing sources across the SDG sectors under review. 
These initial considerations provide a general framework for understanding the capital structure of some SDG investments. However, further analysis of sector specificities is necessary to better understand possible financing options and the practical reality of each sector. 
Table 1: Examples of cash flow sources per sector 
TYPE OF CASH FLOW
 EXAMPLES of CASH FLOWS IN HIGHLIGHTED SECTORS 

Sub-National Finance
Water and Sanitation
Energy
Terrestrial ecosystem
Tariffs / User Fees / User Investment 
- Fees (e.g. for public transport / trash collection / parking)


- User investment (e.g. toilets or / boreholes)
- Fees to water utilities

- User investment (e.g. clean cooking fuels / solar panels)
- Fees to energy utilities/ energy service companies
- Savings on energy bills (energy efficiency)
- Payment for ecosystems services
- Green commodities
- Biodiversity offsets

Taxes / Public Subsidies/ Domestic Transfers
- Local Taxes (e.g. property taxes)
- Transfers from central governments
- Transfers from central governments 
- Targeted subsidies 

- Public subsidies (e.g. Feed-in tariff premium)
- Tax breaks for energy efficiency 
- Carbon credits
- Budget allocation
- Agricultural subsidies with biodiversity goals

Grants (Donor Assistance / Philanthropy)
- External grants, (e.g. to public transport systems)
- Viability Gap Funding in water projects
-  Technical Assistance for energy audits
- Grants channelled through NGOs
- REDD +
2. Sub-national finance
SDG 11 aims to make cities inclusive, safe, resilient and sustainable in a context of unprecedented urban growth. In 2015, close to 4 billion people — 54 per cent of the world’s population — lived in cities and that number is projected to increase to about 5 billion people by 2030. In the least developed countries (LDCs), the proportion of urban population is expected to increase from 31 per cent in 2014 to 49 per cent in 2050. Such rapid growth demands significant investments at the sub-national level, including in housing, public transport, water, and waste management. In some countries, SNGs already contribute significantly to financing and delivering infrastructure, at nearly 40 per cent of public investment. It is estimated that more than 70 per cent of infrastructure will be built in urban areas, and that by 2030 these investments could be greater than the $50 trillion value of all the infrastructure in the world today. However, subnational governments, especially second-tier cities, face considerable challenges in mobilizing adequate revenue to meet recurrent expenditures and make long-term investments in support of inclusive and sustainable local development. Least developed countries (LDCs) face the steepest challenges. Addressing these challenges require a better understanding of the financing options available to SNGs. 
2.1. Characteristics of sub-national finance
SNGs have to finance their operational expenditures as well as a range of investments. Their financing sources include: local taxes and user fees; transferred national or state revenues; and borrowing from public and private lenders. Transfers from a higher level of government are typically the most significant source in this category, underscoring the importance of effective national / sub-national interfaces. 
The projects they need to finance have different cash flow profiles, which influence the kind of financing they can use. While revenue generating investments (e.g. public transport systems) are more suitable for borrowing, social investments, like school buildings, are more likely to be financed out of transfers or tax financing. Subnational government’s creditworthiness also affects the type of instruments available, with stronger entities capable of accessing capital markets. The following table provides a framework to assess the range of finance options available to SNGs.
Table 2: Illustrative financing arrangements by type of investment and SNG creditworthiness
TYPE OF INVESTMENT
SNG INCOME LEVEL/CREDITWORTHINESS

Low
Medium
High
Self-Financing
Mix of Loans (possibly subsidized) and Transfers
Mix of Loans (possibly subsidized) and Bonds (if feasible)
Mix of Bonds and Loans
Partially Revenue Generating
Mix of Loans (likely subsidized) and Transfers
Mix of Loans (likely subsidized) and Transfers
Mix of Loans (possibly subsidized) and Transfers (if justified)
Non-Self-Financing/ Social Purpose
Transfers Only
Mix of Loans (possibly subsidized) and Transfers
Mix of Loans (possibly subsidized) and Transfers (if justified)
Source: Smoke, Paul (2017), “Policies, Reforms and Strategies for Enhancing Subnational Development Finance”, paper commissioned by UCLG, UNCDF and UN-HABITAT for the expert group meeting of the Inter-Agency Task Force on Financing for Development (IATF) on subnational finance, UN Headquarters, 29 November 2017.
2.2. Action Areas
Action areas for sub-national financing include raising domestic revenues through user fees and taxes, including defining the most appropriate types of taxation for SNGs, and fostering sustainable access to long-term finance. 
Reforms and actions will, however, depend on specific country conditions, such as the existing experience of a country with decentralization, the legal systems in place, the levels of institutional development and capacity.
2.2.1. Promoting revenue raising authorities
In many countries, SNGs have limited fiscal authority and capacities to raise their own revenues. Intergovernmental transfers are dominant because central governments have an inherent advantage in revenue generation. Nonetheless, SNGs are often in a better position to plan and manage a range of local public services in a more holistic manner since local governments are more likely to think about the linkages among service sectors compared to national governments, where sectoral ministries tend to focus on the services they are directly concerned with. The ability of SNGs to raise resources depends on the extent to which they have adequate fiscal powers as well as capacity and incentives to use them. This requires both a clear de jure legal framework as well as de facto autonomy and independence at appropriate levels. One lesson from experiences with sub-national taxation is that it is important not to let sources of revenue, or some types of taxes, create disproportionate administrative costs compared to the collected revenues.
Empowering sub-national authorities
As noted above, two common revenue sources for sub-national governments are user fees and local taxes. User fees helps establishing accountability for service delivery, though they can also render some services too expensive for the poor. Regarding taxes, surcharges and property taxes are particularly useful on the sub-national level.
Surcharges (known as piggyback taxes) allow SNGs to add a usually small, but sometimes significant, percentage onto the same tax base and through the same collection system as taxes at the national level (e.g. sale and income taxes), thus exploiting more efficient centralized revenue administration. As such, they are easier to implement than other forms of taxation.
Property taxes are harder to avoid than many other types of taxes because real estate is not moveable. However, property taxes require developing a cadastral system for tracking ownership, along with continued update of real estate valuations. 
Capitalizing on the revenue potential of municipal assets
SNGs should consider whether they could better utilize the real estate they own and enhance the performance of utilities and commercial assets they control. Land is one of the most valuable municipal assets and SNGs may use land value capture mechanisms as a financial tool, in particular for cities. These mechanisms follow the basic logic that enhanced accessibility to new infrastructure, such as mass transit systems, adds value to land and real estate. As this value premium results from public investments, SNGs should try to capture the surplus, for example by using taxes or other mechanisms. Land exchange or land concessions need to be carefully managed to ensure transactions remain in the public interest. Also, environmental considerations need to be factored in as “undeveloped lands” may provide important ecosystem services. In this respect, transparency around land ownership and permits for development is paramount to avoid conflict of interest and corruption. 
2.2.2. Strengthening institutional frameworks for national / sub-national interface
To make sub-national finance a powerful instrument of development, strengthening the coherence and collaboration between central and subnational authorities is critical. Sub-national development finance does not exist in a vacuum and there are a number of fundamental conditions that must be in place or developed over time. 
• SNGs cannot play a developmental role unless they are empowered to act autonomously. A good institutional framework is expected to include formal and clear assignment of functions and revenue generation responsibility as well as systems and processes to support implementation. 
• SNG operations should be sufficiently transparent and accountable. This includes downward accountability to citizens through elections and non-electoral means, and upward accountability to ensure that basic financial management procedures are followed and legitimate national goals and standards adhered to.
• SNGs need the capacity and incentives to function effectively (for example, to strengthen SNG financial and asset management systems and administer SNG taxes and fees). 
• Intergovernmental transfers should be made more predictable and transparent. Stability will help local authorities to plan while reasonable flexibility on the use of transfers will allow SNG to respond to local needs. 
• Transfers should contribute to global, national, and local developmental goals, such as reducing disparities among SNGs and creating incentives to focus on SDGs. For example, it is possible to incorporate gender equality objectives into the transfer system of national funds to lower levels of government, to stimulate local governments’ commitment to incorporating gender-oriented goals in public policies.
2.2.3. Fostering access to sustainable long-term finance
Borrowing can be challenging for many SNGs. Capital markets in many developing countries are underdeveloped, and many SNGs are not creditworthy, so that interest rates charged by domestic and international lenders are often unaffordable. The World Bank estimated that less than 20 percent of the largest 500 cities in developing countries are deemed creditworthy in their local context, severely constricting their capacity to finance investments in public infrastructure, with only a fraction of the creditworthy cities able to issue municipal bonds. Despite challenges, there are means to promote and support SNG access to long-term finance. Many countries have developed, or are developing, SNG borrowing and fiscal responsibility frameworks, which aim to provide a foundation for credible borrowing. The following table presents a variety of instruments, ranging from public to private, which SNG’s may use, depending on national and local conditions, and levels of investor confidence. 
Table 3: Subnational lending mechanisms / External source revenue
MANAGEMENT AND FINANCE
OWNERSHIP

Government Agency
Government Owned
Mixed Public-Private
Private Entity
Lead Institution
Ministry of Finance or Local Government
Development Bank, Fund or Utility
Development Bank or Fund
Commercial Banks, Financial Markets, Private Investors
Source(s) of Finance
National Budget or External Donors
National budget, SNG contributions, External donors or financial institutions
National budget, SNG Contributions, Private Investors, Depositors, External Investors
Private Finance 
Source: Smoke, Paul (2017), “Policies, Reforms and Strategies for Enhancing Subnational Development Finance”, paper commissioned by UCLG, UNCDF and UN-HABITAT for the expert group meeting of the Inter-Agency Task Force on Financing for Development (IATF) on subnational finance, UN Headquarters, 29 November 2017.
International public finance
Multilateral and National Development Banks can lend more widely to SNGs through innovative and responsible instruments (e.g. innovative credit enhancement for subnational loans and reduction of foreign exchange risks). Other initiatives are also desirable, such as means to improve the access of SNGs to climate-change financing mechanisms to facilitate investments in resilient and sustainable infrastructure. Development cooperation among SNGs, also known as “Decentralised Development Co-operation (DDC)”, is also emerging. From 2005 to 2015, DDC volumes grew by 1 percemt per year to USD 1.9 billion in 2015 and represents 6 percent of bilateral ODA among members reporting on these volumes.
Enhancing access to commercial finance 
As noted above, a sound legal framework, careful planning, transparency, good governance, and financial sustainability are prerequisites to enabling SNG’s borrowing capacity. SNGs may create a separate legal entity, such as special purpose vehicle (SPV), to borrow money for public infrastructure investments, as the vehicle might have a higher credit rating than the SNG since ownership of the municipal quality assets are typically transferred to it, such as public land and shares of public utilities. The risk, however, is that these entities can accumulate unsustainable amount of debt and evade public oversight. Hence, transparency is critical to ensure that debt levels are carefully monitored. (See chapter III.E.) There should also be explicit clarity given about the level of sovereign guarantee provided by the national authorities for any subnational government borrowing.
Ultimately, and with the right conditions in place, SNGs may be able access capital markets and issue municipal bonds. Development banks can support municipalities in this process by issuing guarantees that can help lower the cost of financing and/or lengthen the maturity of issuances. 
Public-Private Partnerships (PPP)
Public-private partnerships (PPPs) could potentially help SNGs secure expertise and funds from the private sector, particularly for revenue generating projects. City-level PPPs are common in sectors such as public transport, water and housing. However, PPP projects tend to be complex and local authorities often lack the necessary capacity to both negotiate PPP deals and effectively regulate private operators. At the central level, many governments have created PPP units to address this issue. Reinforcing the linkages between the central PPP unit and SNGs is a way to better support local authorities with their PPP projects. 
Safeguards need to be in place to ensure the fiscal sustainability of these projects and preserve public interests, while guaranteeing access for the more vulnerable to public services. Enhancing the transparency of these deals should help strengthen accountability. A higher level of disclosure in PPP projects should also go hand in hand with more disclosure of publicly financed infrastructure projects (actual costs vs. budget) as this will support decision making between PPP and traditional procurement in the future.

2020 FSDR - Chapter 2
Chapter II. Financing Sustainable Development in an Era of Transformative Digital Technologies 
1. Introduction 
Digital technologies have come into much sharper focus since 2015, impacting the main areas of finance and development highlighted in the Addis Ababa Action Agenda: (i) financial markets; (ii) public finance; and (iii) development pathways (trade and investment). 
Digital technologies create tremendous opportunity for achieving a more sustainable financial system that supports the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs). The promise of digital technologies is clear: they can enable inclusion and wider access to products and services and increase efficiencies, particularly in the financial sector and in public financial management. They can also strengthen societal resilience to crises. During the COVID-19 outbreak, digital communication tools help sustain human interaction and continuity in some vital economic activities, although many developing countries do not have such capacities, putting them at a disadvantage. 
But like similar transitions in previous eras, rapid technological change also causes “growing pains” and the emergence of new risks. How quickly and effectively policies and regulatory frameworks adjust will determine their contribution to sustainable development. 
Our current institutions and policy frameworks are often ill equipped to address new risks such as the growing dominance and market power of big tech firms across sectors and national borders. In some sectors and countries (e.g., payments in China, financial inclusion in East Africa), digital technologies are causing rapid and dramatic change; in others, impacts are much more gradual or uncertain. How frontier digital technologies will evolve over the next ten years, and how they will affect inequality, jobs, and development pathways, remains unclear.
No country, and no financing and economic policy domain, will remain entirely unaffected. While policy solutions will always be context specific and depend on a country’s unique circumstances, all countries must get ready today to be prepared for an increasingly digital economy of tomorrow. This thematic chapter of the Financing for Sustainable Development Report 2020 presents policy options across all action areas of the Addis Agenda to harness the potential of digital technologies for the benefit of people, ensuring that gains are shared widely and risks are managed carefully, and that national actions are supported by collective global measures. 
Several key recommendations emerge from the analysis in this report:
• Take a strategic approach to digital finance to provide a common frame of reference for all actors. This can take different forms—as part of a science, technology and innovation (STI) strategy or road map, a dedicated digital economy strategy, or explicit integration of digital technologies in the broader planning process (e.g., embedded in a country’s integrated national financing framework); 
• Put basic building blocks in place today to participate in the digital economy, including (i) prerequisite infrastructure; (ii) digital skills; and (iii) updated enabling regulatory and policy environments; 
• Revisit policy frameworks and the regulatory architecture to respond to the cross-cutting and wide-ranging effects of digital technologies on financing. Silo-style regulation will not be viable when digital technologies, information and communications technology (ICT), data, finance, and other sectors interact in myriad ways; 
• Maintain a level playing field to ensure that the entry of players that harness the power of big data leads to innovation and diversification rather than market domination (e.g., big tech in the financial sector). Digital technologies should benefit people not just as consumers, but also in their role as producers and workers; 
• Identify labour-intensive development pathways to avoid incentivizing digital technologies that are labour-replacing when unemployment is a major policy challenge. Preparing for the digital age can be pursued in parallel to supporting more labour-intensive development pathways, in a two-pronged approach; 
• Step up global collaboration on digital technologies and finance to create spaces for peer learning among policymakers and regulators, to strengthen capacity support, and to facilitate coordinated responses, such as global guidelines and standards.
The next section of this chapter lays out the challenges and opportunities that digital technologies create for sustainable development. It traces these to the unique properties of digital technologies (an almost costless flow of unprecedented amounts of data, which lowers transaction costs and can help overcome inefficiencies linked to information failure) and describes their impacts on financial and product markets. The third section puts forward financing policy and institutional responses across the action areas of the Addis Agenda to achieve the SDGs. This section examines the basic building blocks of a digital economy, and the three highlighted areas of finance and development: financial markets, public finance and development pathways.
2. The impact of new digital technologies on economies and societies
2.1.	Which opportunities and challenges do digital technologies create for sustainable development?
Digital technologies can be a key lever for achieving the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and leaving no one behind. Ranging from technologies that have become ubiquitous, such as mobile phones, to frontier technologies like artificial intelligence (AI), they offer the promise of greater access for more people to an ever-widening array of products and services (see box II.1 for an overview of key digital technologies). Some have called digital technologies inherently inclusive due to the unique properties they possess. Furthermore, by enhancing efficiency, digital technologies can also be an enabler for sustained,more sustainable and resilient growth, decarbonization, and resource and energy efficiency. For example, during the COVID-19 outbreak, remote communication technologies enabled the preservation of essential human interactions and thus prevented the complete cessation of economic activity. 
Some changes resulting from digital technologies are gradual and almost imperceptible, while others are sudden and obvious. There are countless examples across all 17 SDGs where digital technologies are already making a difference. In the financial sector, digital technology is being leveraged to facilitate payments, intermediation and risk management, with important implications for the poor and underserved. In public financial management, they help deliver programmes more effectively and reduce leakages. In manufacturing and services, digital technologies are changing the nature of production and work. Their ability to address sustainable development challenges is of course not limitless; digital technologies are not a panacea. Many people remain excluded from the digitalized economy (box II.2 spells out how the terms “digital” and “digitalized” economy will be used in this report). Impacts on the distribution of income and opportunities are highly ambiguous. Furthermore, digital technologies have not led to less resource-intensive growth patterns. Indeed, uncertainty over viable sustainable development pathways abounds. 
     Questions arise across all three dimensions of sustainable development:
• What will be the jobs of the future? What are viable development pathways in the digital era?
• Are we heading for an era of inclusion and opportunity, or will the digital and data divide further increase inequalities and discrimination?
• Will digitalization dematerialize production and reduce our environmental footprint, or will increased energy use caused by digitalization outpace potential energy savings? 
Box II.1
What are the key digital technologies? 
Technological innovation has been the main driver of long-term growth and prosperity over the last 200 years. Transformative general-purpose technologies, such as electricity or the internal combustion engine, have fueled global growth of gross domestic product. Each of these technologies spawned a wealth of innovations that, once economies and societies had fully adjusted, lifted living standards for the vast majority.a 
Digital technologies, which build on the storage and processing of information represented in bits, were first developed after the Second World War. Software and hardware industries have grown rapidly ever since, but for much of the twentieth century, their impact remained limited. It was only with the rise of the Internet in the 1990s, which enabled computer-to-computer communication at low cost, that multiple markets and sectors were impacted, and digital technology became a new, general-purpose technology.b 
Increased connectivity has been a defining feature of digital technological progress over the last three decades. Today, devices and people routinely share enormous amounts of data, leaving rapid, real-time trails of information behind. Building on this ubiquity of digital data and increasing computational power, recent years have seen the emergence of several closely linked digital frontier technologies:c 
• Cloud computing refers to shared pools of hardware comprised of computer networks, servers, data storage and applications software that can be rapidly mobilized through the Internet. Cloud computing minimizes fixed costs for hardware and other complementary investments. Companies using cloud services by third-party providers such as Amazon, Google, Microsoft, IBM, Alibaba and others are billed according to storage space and computer run time. They do not have to shoulder the full costs of acquiring, setting up, and operating hardware and software; 
• The diffusion of smartphones and other Internet connected devices has facilitated aggregation of big data sets that underlies the implementation of digital technologies. With the advent of cloud storage, very large data sets can be conveniently stored, accessed and analysed on a massive scale. Superfast computers can use big data to discern patterns and predict trends, which can aid decision-making in areas ranging from finance to aero-engine maintenance; 
• Artificial Intelligence (AI), which includes machine learning and deep learning, is at the leading edge of digital technology. A new crop of algorithms and the availability of much greater computing power is enabling machines to learn from the examples and experience captured in big data. For example, a deep learning algorithm for a self-driving car must recognize vehicles, pedestrians and cyclists, in all hours of the day and in all weather conditions. With the help of thousands of images, the nested set of algorithms for neural networks conceptualizes the image of a vehicle. Once trained, the network can identify any vehicle with a high degree of probability. The utility of neural networks extends to robo-investment, credit analysis and other areas; 
• With 5G networks, greater interconnection and improved edge computing devices, the Internet of Things (IoT) and the Internet of Manufacturing Things (IoMT) is likely to flourish. AI-enabled computers the size of a credit card are already installed in vehicles, in machinery and infrastructures to monitor conditions, signal problems and trigger a response; 
• Distributed ledger technology (DLT) is a database technology that allows the creation, storage and secure transfer of information. Often referred to as blockchain, this technology stores records of information across distributed computers. DLT can be public (permissionless), in which case all participants have the exact same role, or private (permissioned), where some participants have specific rights, such as the ability to accept new participants or audit the ledger.
aShahid Yusuf, “Development Pathways in the Context of New and Emerging Digital Technologies” (2019). Background paper prepared for this report. 
bAvi Goldfarb and Catherine Tucker, “Digital Economics”, Journal of Economic Literature, vol. 57, Issue 1 (March 2019), pp. 3-43. Available at https://doi.org/10.1257/jel.20171452.
cAdapted from Yusuf. 2019. 

Box II.2 
The digital and digitalized economy: on terminology
Digital technologies impact all sectors of the economy. In line with other recent major United Nations reports, this chapter differentiates between the following:
• The core digital sector, responsible for developing and providing key digital technologies (for example, cloud computing and artificial intelligence); 
• The digital economy, or “that part of economic output derived solely or primarily from digital technologies with a business model based on digital goods or services,”a which includes a broader range of activities that create economic value through the application of these technologies (for example, digital platforms and digital services); and
• The digitalized economy, which describes wider structural implications of digitalization for the economy as a whole.b
aRumana Bukht and Richard Heeks, “Defining, Conceptualising and Measuring the Digital Economy”, ESRC Development Informatics Working Papers Series No. 68 (2017).
bJ. Scott Brennen and Daniel Kreiss, “Digitalization”, The International Encyclopedia of Communication Theory and Philosophy (23 October 2016). 
Figure II.1
Conceptual overview of the digital economy

Source: Bukht & Heeks (2017), UNCTAD (2019).
        2.1.1.	Digital technologies, jobs and growth
Concerns about the digital economy are greatest around jobs. Estimates of future job losses due to automation and AI vary widely, ranging from a low of 5 to 10 per cent to almost half of all existing jobs. So far, the widespread introduction of digital technologies has not led to a rise in unemployment. There is, however, evidence that digital technologies have contributed to greater wage inequality in developed countries, as routine and manual jobs have disappeared, with those affected by job losses forced to accept lower-skilled and lower-paying jobs (e.g., in services industries) (see chapter I on the global context). 
While most analysis of automation focuses on developed countries, developing countries are also affected. Developing countries’ comparative advantage of low-cost labour may erode. Automation could reduce the potential of the manufacturing sector (and some services) to absorb the large number of workers, including youth, that enter the labour force each year. So far, evidence of adverse effects of automation in developing countries is limited, but this may change over time. This raises the question whether traditional development pathways that focus on labour-intensive manufacturing exports are still viable. 
These questions are mirrored in what is sometimes called the “productivity paradox”. On the one hand, the accumulation of ICT capital and digital technologies contributes to global growth of gross domestic product. Mobile broadband penetration and digitalization is essential for regional economic growth in developing countries in particular. On the other hand, expectations of rapid income and productivity growth are not yet matched by hard evidence. This may reflect excessive optimism regarding digital technologies’ transformative potential, or mismeasurement, or merely a time lag until such potential is fully realized. Indeed, historically, major new technologies have taken decades to have measurable effects (see also box I.3 in chapter I). At this point, there is uncertainty over the medium- and long-term growth impacts of digitalization. 
        2.1.2. 	Digital technologies and inclusion 
Because digital technologies provide goods and services at dramatically reduced cost, they have facilitated the inclusion of marginalized and excluded people. Financial inclusion is the most prominent example and signature success story, with fintech playing a key role in the rapid growth of access to financial services globally (see chapter III.G). Yet, the impact of digital technologies on equity is ambiguous. Access to digital technologies remains very uneven. While over three quarters of the world’s population is likely to have access to or own a mobile phone, only half is using the Internet. The gender gap in Internet use is growing in Africa and in least developed countries (see also chapter III.G). 
Digital technologies may also exacerbate inequality and discrimination, as algorithms inherit biases from their human authors, or as AI is developed with data that contains a history of bias and discrimination. Algorithms and AI—ranging from ranking job applications, deciding who qualifies for insurance and more—have serious implications, including on gender equality and women’s empowerment. For example, fintech lenders, informed by algorithmic decision-making, have been found to charge interest rate premiums to minority communities, while advertisements for high-paying jobs are disproportionally targeted at men. Popular voice assistants are commonly coded as female by default. 
Furthermore, access to more advanced production technologies remains highly unequal. Far from making geographical location irrelevant, economic activity related to digital technologies is increasingly concentrated in a few urban areas with good infrastructure and, especially, access to a large pool of highly skilled workers. This contributes to a self-reinforcing mechanism that increases the concentration of opportunity, income and wealth. Geographic concentration of value capture in the digital economy also extends beyond borders: the two largest economies alone, the United States of America and China, account for 97 per cent of market capitalization of platforms valued at more than $1 billion globally (72 and 25 per cent, respectively). 
        2.1.3.	Digital technologies and the environment
Digitalization holds the prospect of dematerialization of production, and thus of more sustainable growth patterns. This is because more services can be provided digitally, and because “smarter” production and distribution systems can enhance efficiencies—for example, with respect to energy use (box II.3). At the same time, digitalization dramatically increases energy use. So far, this demand-effect far outstrips any other effects on sustainability. Digital technologies were responsible for 2.5 per cent of global greenhouse gas emissions in 2013, and this share is predicted to increase to 4 per cent in 2020 and 8 per cent in 2025, mostly due to increases in energy consumption.
Box II.3
Digital technologies and energy use
Digital technologies, and especially new networked and artificial intelligence (AI) applications, are rapidly emerging as important drivers of change in energy systems and for energy demand.a Internet-connected digital technologies and “smarter” energy systems (e.g., smart heating controls) will play an important role in transitioning to a more sustainable and energy efficient economic system. Yet, energy savings may be concentrated, or even outweighed by the high energy use of many digital innovations. For example: 
• The energy footprint of all smart phones per average year of use was 30 per cent larger than that of passenger cars in 2015, and this gap is expected to continue to grow in line with more rapidly increasing numbers of smart phones;b 
• Online video streaming is on the same order of magnitude as air transport in terms of energy use and CO2 emissions (1.0 and 2.5 per cent of global CO2 emissions, respectively). Video streaming on mobile phones is vastly more energy consuming, with 5G expected to further increase overall power consumption;c
• Algorithms rely on vast amounts of data that are stored in data centers. Bottom-up estimates for data centers’ energy use in 2030 range from between a five-fold increase (from 200 to 1,000 TWh) to a fourteen-fold increase to roughly 4,900 TWh.
     Traditional government energy policies, such as electricity market reform and price incentive schemes, are needed to support the development of new services and devices that are energy-efficient or energy-saving. Government-backed, long-term research and development on novel materials, devices and new computing architectures including quantum computing can further help to reduce power consumption of digital technologies and AI systems.d
aRoehrl Richard, “Exploring the impacts of artificial intelligence on the global energy system”, SLP/TFM Research Paper (December 2019). Available at https://sustainabledevelopment.un.org/index.php?page=view&type=12&nr=3335.
bVaclav Smil, Energy and Civilization: A History, (Cambridge, Massachusetts, The MIT Press, November 2018). 
cChris Preist, Daniel Schien and Paul Shabajee, “Evaluating Sustainable Interaction Design of Digital Services: The Case of YouTube”, in Proceedings of CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems Proceedings (Glasgow, Scotland UK, May 2019).
dKlaus Fichter, “E-commerce: sorting out the environmental consequences”, Journal of Industrial Ecology, vol.6, Issue 2 (08 February 2008), pp. 25-41.
     Before analysing financing policy and institutional responses that can help ensure that digital technologies contribute to sustainable finance and achieving the SDGs (section 3), it is first necessary to understand the unique properties that characterize digital technologies. 
2.2.	What are the economic properties of digital technologies?
Digital technology has dramatically reduced the costs of storing, processing and transmitting data. As a result, it has made unprecedented amounts of economically relevant information available to economic agents, such as digital data collected from the footprints of personal, social and business activities on mobile phones, social media and the Internet (see also box II.4 on the data economy). 
Analogous to previous periods of technological change, digital technologies impact economic activity in two broad areas:
• They facilitate a more effective exchange or flow of information, goods and services. Companies have access to relevant economic and financial information, can more easily reach customers, coordinate suppliers, and organize their operations. This is similar in impact to the contributions made by railways, shipping containers, telegrams and similar innovations in the past;
• They increase efficiency and lower the cost in the production of goods and services. Digitalization allows companies to save on raw materials, energy, storage space, time and labour. Information and communications technology, robots and other digital technologies play the same role that the spinning jenny or the steam engine played in previous industrial revolutions. 
2.2.1	Why digital is different
Digital technologies also possess several unique properties that qualitatively change how goods and services are produced and, in some cases, change market structures. They include
• Information, search and transportation costs that are close to zero. Unprecedented amounts of data can be collected because digital activity is easily recorded and activities can be tracked. This can help to overcome information-related market failures—in finance, for example. Searching for information is also cheaper, helping consumers to discover a wider variety of goods and supplies, and firms to access new markets; 
• Digital goods represented in bits can be reproduced at essentially zero cost (economies of scale in economic terms) and can be consumed over and over again (i.e., they are non-rival in consumption). Additional users often increase the value of digital goods for existing users (network effects), which can lead to large firms and greater market concentration. Digital firms can thus grow quickly and obtain large market shares and achieve vast scale without mass. 
Box II.4
The data economya
Digital data has become an increasingly important input for the production of goods and financial and other services. Companies have learned to harvest and extract valuable information from vast amounts of data and turn it into an asset of significant value. 
     The data value chain begins with data collected from individuals and connected devices in the Internet of Things. Aggregators and custodians store and organize the data, making it accessible and marketable. Algorithms analyse and extract useful information. Data presenters then translate the results into insights for their clients. Data giants like Amazon leverage the entire data value chain. They capture data from both consumers and their production chain, organize and analyse the data, and extract insights. 
Figure II.2
The data value chain

Source: UN DESA elaboration, based on Opher and others, 2016.

     The data economy is growing in size; it represents 1.0, 0.8, and 0.5 per cent of gross domestic product (GDP) of the United States of America, Japan and the European Union, respectively. It also generates much larger indirect and secondary economic effects. In the European Union, for example, the total impact of the data market on the region’s economy in 2017 was €336 billion, or 2.4 per cent of total GDP. This is because the data increases the value of upstream industries that can monetize it.
     How value is generated in the data economy has important distributional, privacy, ethical and public policy implications. Data-driven industries are highly concentrated. Access to detailed personal data increasingly allows companies to charge each customer different prices. The collection and use of personal data, designed to influence behavior, also carries with it a potential for abuse. With a few large firms dictating the terms and conditions of data availability and use (as well as capturing the profits), the data economy can further exacerbate income and wealth inequality, and even impact the security and stability of political systems.
aBased on Hoi Wai Jackie Cheng, Marcelo LaFleur and Hamid Rashid, “Data Economy: Radical transformation or dystopia?”, UNDESA Frontier Technologies Quarterly (New York: United Nations Department of Economic and Social Affairs, January 2019). Available at https://www.un.org/development/desa/dpad/wp-content/uploads/sites/45/publication/FTQ_1_Jan_2019.pdf.
2.3.	How do digital technologies affect market structures and business models? 
The properties described above find their reflection in market outcomes. Digital technologies lower production costs and prices. In a digitalized economy, firms might find it easier to access new markets. But this has not always led to more competition. Instead, market concentration is growing in many sectors, particularly in the digital economy itself where global platforms play a dominant role. So how are market structures and business models affected?
First, lower prices are a key benefit of digital technology. For example, in the media industry, most products are now sold in digital format, so that the cost of production and distribution of additional items (the marginal cost) is almost zero. In the financial sector, digital technology can lower the cost of financial services, including credit, and expanding its reach to the previously unbanked. In sectors where goods and services are still delivered physically, key components in the value chain—such as design, marketing, back-office work, or logistics management—can be digitized and provided at reduced cost. Technologies such as AI facilitate analysis of vast amounts of data and solve increasingly complex problems. As a result, a growing number of tasks previously performed by humans can be automated. This includes increasingly non-routine and cognitive tasks that were once long beyond the remit of machines. 
Second, digitalization technologies can lower entry barriers and present opportunities for firms, including those in developing countries, to access larger markets. The Internet, cloud-based computing, and open software drastically reduce the need for major investments in software and services. Even cutting-edge technologies such as AI can now be rented by firms in both developed and developing countries by the hour through cloud-based computing platforms. In many sectors, the main non-labour costs of a start-up are a laptop computer and an Internet connection, together with cloud-based computing services and/or a 3D printer. Digital technologies’ impact reaches beyond the core digital economy: by reducing export costs for micro, small and medium-sized enterprises (MSMEs) in developing countries, the Internet has expanded their access to global markets. Cheap reproduction and easier search and matching of actors mean that geographic boundaries become much less relevant.
Third, online platforms have emerged as important new forms of intermediation. Platform-centred businesses have a major advantage in the data-driven economy. They can record and extract all data related to online actions and interactions among their users. This data can then be monetized, for example, by selling targeted online advertising, operating e-commerce platforms, renting out cloud services, or allowing consumers and/or firms to share their underutilized assets (the sharing economy). Thanks to network effects (a product or service gains additional value as more people use it), online platforms can grow and gain market share very quickly.
Seven of the world’s top eight companies by market capitalization use platform-based business models. Google has about 90 per cent of the global market for Internet searches. Facebook accounts for two thirds of the global social media market. Amazon boasts an almost 40 per cent share of the world’s online retail activity. In China, Alibaba has been estimated to have close to 60 per cent of the Chinese e-commerce market. WeChat (owned by Tencent) has more than one billion active users and, together with Alipay (Alibaba), its payment solution has captured virtually the entire Chinese market for digital payments. Such platforms can eliminate intermediaries and rent-seekers, enhancing market efficiencies. At the same time, global digital platforms have taken steps to consolidate their competitive positions, which may end up slowing down economic dynamism and precluding developing-country platforms from reaching competitive scale. 
Fourth, market concentration is growing across industries and countries, despite lower entry barriers. “Winner take most” mechanisms have become more common even beyond the core digital economy, and digital technologies are partly responsible. A small number of so-called superstar firms have increased their productivity (and profits), as increasingly complex technologies require evermore sophisticated complementary investments and highly specialized skills in the workforce, while the majority of firms, even in the same industry, have lagged behind. 
3. Sustainable financing and development policies for a digital era 
Changing business models and market structures demand a comprehensive rethink of financing and development policy and regulatory approaches. Digital technologies 
• Affect all parts of society and economy, hence any policy responses need to be mindful of their impacts across traditional industry boundaries, policy domains and on various stakeholders;
• Are complex and highly technical, so that no one actor is likely to have sufficient knowledge and information to make informed decisions;
• Are evolving rapidly, so that experiences with new technologies are often limited and uncertainty over future developments is high. 
For this reason, countries should take a strategic, whole-of-society approach, which engages all relevant stakeholders, and can solicit relevant information, raise awareness and provide a common frame of reference for all actors. This is reflected in the Addis Agenda, where Member States committed to “adopt science, technology and innovation strategies as integral elements of our national sustainable development strategies”. In practice, these strategic responses can take different forms—as part of an STI strategy or STI road maps, a dedicated digital economy strategy, or through the explicit integration of digital technologies in broader planning processes (e.g., embedded in a country’s integrated national financing framework). 
The concrete elements of these strategies will vary depending on each individual country’s stage of development and its respective involvement in the creation and use of digital technologies. Since technological change is a key source of growth and sustainable development, all countries need to exploit its potential while being mindful of any possible negative externalities. This requires, before all else, investment in the basic building blocks that enable participation in the digital economy.
Putting basic building blocks in place: investing in infrastructure and skills to be digital-ready (Addis Agenda action area G, on science, technology, innovation and capacity-building, and data)
The basic building blocks of a digital economy—infrastructure, Internet access, digital skills and regulatory and data policies—ensure that individuals and firms are connected to and can function in the digital world. But providing access alone is not enough to (a) address new opportunities and risks in financial markets, (b) respond to new challenges and opportunities in public finance, and (c) chart viable development pathways. The remainder of the chapter will look at policy and institutional responses across the action areas of the Addis Agenda, clustered in three broad financing areas: 
(i) The financial sector How is fintech changing financial markets across payments, savings and credit, and risk management? Will fintech make access to financial services more or less equitable? What are the challenges, such as to financial stability, and what are the policy options? (Addis Agenda action areas B, on private business and finance; E on debt and debt sustainability; and F on systemic issues);
(ii) Public finance How can policymakers use digital technologies to enhance public financial management efficiency and combat illicit financial flows, while adapting tax and expenditure policies to a digitalizing economy? (Addis Agenda action area A); and 
(iii) Development pathways How is the developmental model changing? What investment, trade and technology policy options exist to find development pathways in the context of digitalization? (Addis Agenda action areas B, on private finance and investment, C on international development cooperation, D on trade, and G on science, technology, innovation and capacity building).


Figure II.3
Financing policy responses to the digital revolution: a strategic approach


Source: UN DESA.


2021 FSDR - Chapter 2
II. Risk-informed sustainable finance and development

1. Introduction and key messages
With more than 2 million lives lost at the time of writing, the spread of Covid-19 and its economic fallout are an urgent call for the global community to better prepare for and reduce the risk of catastrophic events. COVID-19 is the latest example of the dramatic financial and sustainable development impacts of risks that materialize in an increasingly complex and interrelated risk landscape. It has shown how the effects of shocks in one area can be transmitted throughout value chains, across geographies and communities, and throughout the wider macro-economy. 
A key lesson from the current crisis is that development that is not risk-informed is neither inclusive nor sustainable. Disasters are often the result of decades of accumulation of risk within social, economic, financial, environmental and political systems. Risk drivers that have not been sufficiently addressed, such as high debt and excess leverage, poverty and inequality, infrastructure that is not resilient, and climate change, will continue to derail SDG financing and progress. Reducing and better managing these risks is indispensable to achieving the SDGs. 
At the same time, investments in the SDGs reduce exposure and vulnerability and are a major driver of resilience.  Complex, systemic, and interrelated risks can be difficult to manage directly – leaving the world ill prepared for crises like the one it is experiencing right now. Traditional risk management tools need to be complemented by investment in prevention, risk reduction and resilience. The 2030 Agenda, the Addis Agenda and the Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction provide a risk reduction strategy and roadmap to building resilience. For example, investments in social protection systems, which can be ramped up in time of need, can help vulnerable groups, households and societies manage risk and volatility, and protect them from poverty in the event of a crisis. 
The case for investing in prevention, risk reduction and resilience is clear, but significant barriers, such as short-termism, inequities, and lack of inclusion in policy making stand in their way. Short-term costs of investments may loom larger than uncertain long-term benefit, for both the public and private sectors. Investments in prevention and resilience have a public good character, and like many public goods, they are underfunded. While private investors evaluate risks as a routine part of investment decision-making, they are often not sufficiently long-term oriented to internalize significant SDG-relevant risks. This leads to inefficient asset allocations that overlook SDG-related investment opportunities and at worst create new risks. And those most exposed and vulnerable to shocks and disasters often lack resources to invest in risk reduction, and voice in relevant policy decisions. 
While all actors must understand, manage and ultimately reduce risks, Governments must lead in taking a risk-informed perspective. First, Governments are the “risk-bearer of last resort”. When a crisis occurs, private risks often become public liabilities (e.g. during a financial crisis, when the public sector bails out the banking sector to limit contagion to the broader economy; or covering the cost of reconstruction following a natural hazard). Second, public policy also shapes the risk landscape for investors and other stakeholders, and it is up to policy makers to ensure that incentives are well aligned with SDG-relevant risks (e.g. through carbon pricing and disaster risk disclosure). Third, in some cases it can be advantageous for the public sector to actively seek risks associated with transformative investments, precisely because these investments may lower risks in the future. For example, investments in innovation are associated with high levels of uncertainty and risk – sometimes too large for private investors to take on – but can have extremely high social returns. Governments can also share investment risks with private investors. 
Policymakers need to mainstream risk considerations in all policies, processes and decisions. This chapter develops a risk framework to help governments navigate the wide landscape of risk management issues and identify policies best suited to respond to different risk challenges.  Such a framework consists of (i), understanding the systemic nature of risk and its implications for the SDGs, including through income, sex, age, and disability disaggregated analysis; (ii) reducing the likelihood of shocks when possible – e.g. strengthening the enabling environment for investment, or climate mitigation; (iii) reducing the impact or cost of shocks and hazards and build resilience; (iv) sharing or transferring residual risks, e.g. through insurance or blended finance; and (v) continuous adaptation to and learning from shocks and risks to be prepared to ‘build back better’. This framework must be underpinned by inclusive governance mechanisms at all levels that elicit and address the concerns and interests of all stakeholders, and particularly the most vulnerable that often have least voice and agency. 
Managing risk requires both that financing is sustainable, risk-informed and resilient, and that sustainability, risk reduction and resilience are financed. To this end, both national and global action is needed. To enhance sustainability and resilience of finance:
• Governments need to mainstream multi-hazard risk analysis in public planning processes, for example in the context of an integrated financing framework; overcome short-term and ex-post biases in budgeting processes, e.g. by earmarking resources for risk reduction; and adopt a multi-instrument approach to manage multiple risks to public balance sheets;
• The private sector needs to overcome short-termism in investment decision making and incorporate all material SDG risks in investment decisions.
Financing for sustainability and risk reduction additionally requires: 
• greater public investments in prevention and risk reduction, e.g. in climate mitigation and risk-informed and resilient infrastructure, and economic diversification;
• strengthening social protection systems; 
• policies and regulations that make incentivize investors to internalize those SDG risks that do not materially impact their financial returns. 
International cooperation must also be strengthened, to:
• tackle global systemic risks that cannot be addressed by any one country, such as risks arising from the international financial system, climate change and pandemics, including by strengthening voice and participation of most vulnerable countries in relevant decision-making;
• enhance support to vulnerable and exposed countries, by strengthening their national capacities and systems to understand and reduce risk, and by putting in place effective ex-ante financing mechanisms for risk reduction and prevention, effective disbursement mechanisms and clear and objective decision-making systems to reduce the need for ex-post support needs in times of crises.

2. The cost of doing nothing
The Covid-19 pandemic and climate change are both manifestations of growing systemic risks – risks that have widespread, cascading effects across geographies and economies. Technological change, urbanization, and globalization have been drivers of economic development across the globe. They have created a world in which economic, technological, political and societal and environmental systems are more connected than ever before. This has led to tremendous opportunity, but has also increased the risk of contagion, including of financial crises, infectious diseases and pandemics, and economic impacts of disasters. Formerly isolated events can develop into large-scale, far reaching catastrophes which are hard to anticipate and manage – they can become systemic risks. Impacts of such systemic risks straddle policy domains and can persist over time – as was the case in the global and long-lasting fall-out from the crisis in the US subprime mortgage market in 2007 and 2008. 
2.1	The Covid-19 shock
The spread of the coronavirus has led to a historic decline in economic activity and living standards across the globe, further exacerbating inequalities and disproportionally affecting the most vulnerable. The pandemic and the ensuing economic crisis have significantly set back implementation of the 2030 Agenda and have reversed progress made in reducing global poverty since 1990. The related economic losses are dramatic, with the global economy contracting by 4.3 per cent in 2020, a decline of global labour income of around USD 3.7 trillion, and prospects for recovery uncertain and uneven (see Chapter II). The crisis disproportionately affected the most vulnerable people and countries, with socioeconomic conditions, ethnicity, gender and geography shaping its impact. Women have been disproportionately impacted by the COVID-19 crisis, are more likely to lose their source of income, and are less likely to be covered by social protection measures, and women-led firms are disproportionately affected by the pandemic. Insufficient progress on the SDGs was thus a driver of further vulnerability. 
The economic and social costs of the pandemic could have been dramatically reduced with comparatively small investments in prevention and preparedness. A global pandemic was repeatedly forecast, and yet the world was not ready.  The lack of preparedness, and insufficient scale and speed of crisis response – ‘too little, too late’ – now threatens to turn temporary setbacks into permanent losses, further increasing societal as well as fiscal costs of crises. Costs of such interventions are extremely small in comparison to the pandemic impact: some estimates suggest that  spending of USD 70-120 billion over the next two years, and USD 20-40 billion annually thereafter would significantly reduce the likelihood of another pandemic; limiting vaccine distribution to advanced economies could cause output losses in advanced economies of up to USD 2 trillion, in addition to the dramatic adverse impacts in developing countries. 
2.2. 	Climate change
Climate costs will increase even under optimistic scenarios, and could reach catastrophic dimensions if greenhouse gas emissions continue to grow at current trajectories. Despite a brief decline in carbon dioxide emissions due to the economic slowdown related to the pandemic, 2020 ranks as the hottest year in recorded history as global temperatures continue to rise. Climate change creates economic costs through physical risks, such as climate-related disasters, and transition risks, as low-carbon strategies create stranded assets. Such economic damages are already substantial: with the earth now 1°C  hotter than pre-industrial levels, climate-related damages due to disasters and worldwide economic stress were estimated to be 165 billion dollars in 2018 (a very conservative estimate). Estimates of future damages are subject to high uncertainty, but there is consensus that they will be substantial: unmitigated warming could lead to average global income losses of over 20 per cent of GDP by 2100 (see also Chapter I). Regions in the Southern Hemisphere and poorer countries are projected to experience the most significant impacts on economic growth – further increasing inequality between countries.
In human development terms, the cost of inaction on climate change is prohibitive. The poorest people are most exposed to climate impacts and least prepared to adapt to the challenges it poses – climate change will likely push more people into poverty. On the current climate trajectory, reductions in global agricultural yields are expected to reach 30 per cent of today’s crop by mid-century, increasing food insecurity and hunger risk in many regions of the world, with disproportionate impacts on the most vulnerable groups. Lack of fresh and sufficient water will increase from afflicting 3.6 billion people today, to 5 billion over the same period. Climate change also poses risks to international peace and security.
The cost of timely investments in mitigation and adaptation are modest in comparison to the prohibitive human, environmental, and economic costs arising from inaction. The IPCC estimates that annual average energy-related investments of USD 2.4 trillion or 2.5 per cent of world GDP would be needed between now and 2035 to limit global warming to 1.5°C - modest in comparison to the prohibitive cost of unmitigated warming. A recent analysis of the European Union’s pathways to achieving its objective of net-zero carbon emissions by 2050 found that this can be achieved at net-zero costs, with cost savings balancing out investment requirements. With regard to climate adaptation, returns on investment in adaptation and resilience have estimated benefit-cost ratios ranging from 2:1 to up to 10:1 for investments in early warning systems. Beneﬁts of investing in disaster risk reduction outweigh costs four-fold.
2.3.	The opportunity – multiple dividends of investing in mitigation, risk reduction and resilience
Investments in prevention, risk reduction and resilience are an economic imperative and have significant social and environmental co-benefits. The economic case for investing in risk reduction and resilience is clear. Such investments also have significant co-benefits. By focusing on risk and risk reduction, governments, businesses and households lengthen their decision and planning horizons, thus helping to address some short-term biases in decision-making. For example, rural households that lack effective risk management tools avoid specializing in a specific occupation and forego necessary investments to reap productivity gains that come with specialization.  Without multi-hazard risk assessments, businesses may choose to invest in locations that offer short-term profit opportunities but expose them to medium- or long-term disaster risks. Investment in resilience often provides basic infrastructure needed for development, while fueling growth and creating jobs. Risk reduction lowers the cost of borrowing (such as the cost of sovereign debt), thus stimulating further investment, in a virtuous cycle. 
Yet, short-term incentives, knowledge gaps, externalities and significant disparities in power and resources stand in the way of risk-informed policy and investment decision. Investments in prevention, risk reduction and resilience have a public good character, calling for public action. Like many public goods, however, they are underfunded and undersupplied. With economic, social and environmental benefits clearly exceeding costs, the question is why economies underinvest in this area. Planning horizons play a role – short-term costs may loom larger than uncertain long-term benefits, creating a bias against investing in risk reduction. This ‘tragedy of the horizon’ is exacerbated by knowledge gaps, which are ever more relevant in a complex and interconnected world where risks are not well understood. There are also free-rider problems when risks primarily affect others, including when addressing global risks and risk drivers that cannot be meaningfully tackled by individual countries.  In addition, significant imbalances in power and interest complicate policy action: those most affected by shocks and crises tend to have least influence over public policy, while more affluent and powerful actors are better able to protect themselves. 
Investments in prevention, risk reduction and resilience are a prerequisite for sustainable development.  Decision-making at all levels must become risk-informed. To this end, we must first better understand risk, as a necessary prerequisite to develop risk strategies. Such strategies should aim to lengthen decision making and investment time-horizons, break down silos in policy making, strengthen global cooperation and solidarity to address global risk drivers, and strengthen the voice of the most vulnerable in decision making processes. The next section lays out a risk and resilience framework geared towards achieving these objectives.

3. Towards a risk and resilience framework for sustainable finance for the SDGs
A global pandemic is one of several risks to SDG progress that had been identified in global risk assessments as one of the greatest threats to sustainable development progress. Other major threats identified include global economic and financial instability; organized crime and terrorism; climate and oceanic change and natural hazards; cyber fragility and technological disruption; geopolitical volatility and other threats to peace and stability; and growing antibiotic resistance. Because of the systemic nature of many risks (see Box 1 for a definition of risk), risk-informed policies will need to take a multi-hazard approach and focus on reducing existing risk, avoiding the creation of new risk and enhancing resilience. 
Because they reduce vulnerabilities, investment in the SDGs themselves can reduce risk and can be a major driver of resilience. Resilient systems or communities have the ability to resist, absorb, accommodate, adapt to, transform and recover from the effects of a hazard in a timely and efficient manner, including through the preservation and restoration of its essential basic structures and functions through risk management. Common ‘characteristics’ of such resilient systems include high levels of diversity, which decreases vulnerability to extreme events (e.g. more diversified economies that are less dependent on a narrow export base); high degrees of equity (e.g. more equitable distribution of assets); or high levels of community involvement and inclusion. Investments in the SDGs themselves and efforts to leave no one behind are thus a major driver of more resilient economies and societies. This relationship is not automatic – investments in sustainable development can also create new risks – but if risks and possible trade-offs are better understood and made explicit, then investments can be risk-informed and create opportunities for sustainable development.
Box 1. 
What is risk – definitions and delineations
Risk in different communities 
Risk is defined differently by different communities. The International Risk Governance Council, for example, defines risk as the ‘unexpected’, or uncertainty about and the severity of the consequences of an activity or event with respect to something that humans value. In the context of disaster risk in particular, this is spelled out as the potential loss of life, injury, or destroyed or damaged assets which could occur to a system, society or a community in a specific period of time, determined probabilistically as a function of hazard, exposure, vulnerability and capacity. In an investment and finance context on the other hand, risk is understood as the probability of actual results (or returns) differing from expected results – this includes positive or negative deviations. Investors will demand higher expected returns for riskier assets, to compensate them for this volatility.
Most fundamentally, then, risk refers to ‘the unexpected’, or the likelihood of deviations in ultimate outcomes of activities, investments or events from expected outcomes. For the purposes of this chapter, which touches on all of the above dimensions and understandings of risk, it is this broad understanding that is applied. 
Risk and uncertainty, risk management and resilience 
Risks can be quantified. For risks such as financial market and credit risks, most disasters, health risks or traffic accidents, the probability of the event occurring and the loss severity can be estimated. Risk management tries to mitigate (prevent, reduce or transfer) these ‘knowable’ risks.
Only a subset of unexpected events can be assessed quantitatively. Many events and their consequences can be assessed only with qualitative methods, if at all. Such non-quantifiable events are often termed “uncertainty”, following the classic terminology by Knight. This is particularly the case in a complex and interconnected world, where small events can have large knock-on effects – or in other words, where risks tend to be systemic. Multi-hazard probabilistic risk assessments can help estimate economic and human impacts of a disaster and invest in risk reduction accordingly in such contexts. Nonetheless, it is not possible to identify, let alone quantify, all events. Enhancing a system’s ability to maintain capacities for action under stressed circumstances, or increasing resilience, is thus an important complement and enhances risk management efforts. 


Governments play a unique and important role in managing risks: their policies shape the risk landscapes for other stakeholders, including investors; but governments are also the ultimate bearer of risk. This is true on the domestic level, but also applies to global governance of the international system. Governments have three distinct but overlapping roles in terms of risk management:
1. Public policy makers are the ultimate bearer of risk to SDG progress. Governments and the people they represent, as the custodians of the 2030 Agenda and the SDGs, are directly concerned with, and ultimately responsible for, risks to their implementation. Governments will by default have to address the fallout from shocks and crises, including tail risks (such as COVID-19) – even when the shock is due to poor risk management by private entities, such as during the global financial crisis. There are powerful incentives that underplay such risks, with ‘wilful blindness’ as an excuse for inappropriate risk management, leaving the public sector to address the fallout. While this includes national action, many risks cannot be addressed by a national government alone; strengthened multilateralism and international cooperation is needed to address global risks that threaten sustainable development. And in some cases, the international community becomes the ultimate bearer of risk, such as when disasters lead to humanitarian crises, underscoring the importance of risk-informed international cooperation. 
2. As the ‘shaper’ of the risk landscape, policymakers can reduce risks for individuals, investors, and other stakeholders, and set incentives to better align private risk-taking with the SDGs. A longstanding objective of public policy, particularly in a development context, is risk reduction to incentivize investments, e.g. by improving the economic enabling environment. Public policy can also be used to regulate and incentivize private stakeholders to reduce risk-creating behaviour, such as through carbon taxes to reduce greenhouse emissions or standards, effective land use planning, codes and regulations to ensure resilient infrastructure and buildings  (see chapter III.A).
3. Governments can also take risk directly on their balance sheets and/or share risks with private investors. While governments are the risk bearer of last resort, such risks are often hidden and not visible on balance sheets, and hence are often insufficiently understood or managed. At the same time, some investments are associated with levels of uncertainty and risk too large for private investors to take on alone. While not necessarily commercially viable, they are socially desirable as they have the potential to generate high social returns and SDG impact – impact that will also strengthen resilience and reduce broader risks to society. In such cases, it may be advantageous for the government to actively take on and manage such risks directly on public balance sheets. If well managed, public development banks and development finance institutions, or risk-sharing instruments such as blended finance, can help to close large investment gaps in many SDG-related areas(see Chapter III.A). 
How financing policies best incorporate risk management will depend on the type and nature of risk that is being addressed. While a full mapping of the SDG risk landscape is beyond the scope of this report, the identification of origins and impacts of key risks (and opportunities) can help determine appropriate financing policy responses, including who is best placed to take action. Box 2 lays out such a categorization, focusing on whether risks are (i) exogenous or endogenous, and (ii) systemic or conventional; and Box 3 provides an illustration for the case of infrastructure from the perspective of investors. For example, the first-best policy response to endogenous risks – risks that are created or shaped by actions of stakeholders – is to reduce them whenever possible. For example, governments can reduce certain investment risks through policies that improve the enabling environment. Conventional risks can also be reduced, and managed through traditional risk sharing techniques, in particular through diversification, including insurance. Systemic risks on the other hand can be reduced, but are difficult or impossible to diversify or insure. To prepare for these risks, governments can invest in resilience, which strengthens the overall ability of the economy and society to withstand shocks and recover.  
Box 2: 
Towards an SDG risk landscape: Origin and Impact of risk
Origin of hazards and shocks
Understanding the origin of hazards and shocks can help policymakers identify ways to best manage risk, as well as to identify who is best placed do so. The STEEP risk classification commonly used by risk managers closely mirrors the SDGs, including: Societal (e.g. inequality or health risks), Technological, Economic (e.g. uneven growth or financialization), Environmental (e.g. climate change or environmental degradation), and (geo)Political (e.g. conflict) risk. ‘Communities of practice’ in each of these domains have expertise in assessing respective risks, and will likely play an important role in addressing them. Within governments, such communities of practice may be mirrored by different ministries. Coordination efforts, e.g. through an integrated national financing framework, can help policymakers examine linkages across areas, and how systemic risks might spread and be prevented.
Risk management responses will differ depending on whether shocks have external origins (are exogenous), or are driven by behaviour and policies of stakeholders (are endogenous). Exogenous shocks originate “outside” the control of a national government or entity; it is thus usually not possible to prevent these, or even reduce their likelihood. In contrast, endogenous shocks are impacted by behaviour. 
Whether risks are exogenous or endogenous depends on perspective: for an investor, project specific risks will be endogenous, but government policy risk will be exogenous; in contrast, from the government’s perspective, policy risks are endogenous – they reflect risks that can be prevented or reduced (i.e. mitigated) through policy reform. On the other hand, no single government can mitigate climate change on its own, and small island States most affected by climate disasters have least agency. For them, these risks are exogenous. The national policy response to such exogenous shocks will generally focus on reducing the impact of hazards, investing in resilience and insuring against risk. To address the root causes of these shocks (e.g. through global climate mitigation efforts), international cooperation is needed. 
Risk impact
How the impact of risks materialize further determines the range of actions.  For risk managers, risks can be categorized as systemic or conventional, each of which entails different responses. 
Systemic risks are characterized by cross-domain impacts (e.g. a health crisis permeating into an economic and fiscal crisis). They affect whole economies, can cross borders, or at least are correlated across a wide range of projects or investments. Because they cross domain boundaries, they often do not neatly fall within the responsibility of a single organization or Ministry, increasing coordination burdens. Systemic risks often share characteristics of so-called “tail risks” – low probability events with a very high impact. Such tail risks are often ignored by both investors and policymakers because they are either poorly understood, are considered too ‘unlikely’, or because time horizons are too short. Yet the impact can be extremely costly, as evidenced by the COVID-19 pandemic. 
Conventional risks have a more limited scope of adverse effects, and are better understood than systemic risks. Conventional risk can be idiosyncratic or specific to a project or investment, without wider knock-on effects or contagion – e.g. technological or operational risks for an infrastructure investment. Because such risks are not highly correlated with other risk factors, they can be managed as part of a diversified portfolio, or through insurance. 


Box 3.
Different types of risk and infrastructure finance 
By understanding risks investors face in an infrastructure project, policy makers can help improve risk-return profiles of investments, and thus help close infrastructure financing gaps: 
• Infrastructure project selection, development and construction phases entail many endogenous risks that are directly impacted by the developer’s behavior – such as quality of construction, or cost overruns. They are difficult to monitor and control by outsiders (be they financial investors or policy makers), and should thus be borne by the operating firms directly involved – e.g. by including penalty clauses in contracts, or other governance arrangements. 
• Risks that are exogenous to the project but idiosyncratic (e.g. demand risks) can be diversified in a portfolio of investments, and could thus be borne by an investor. In a global portfolio, even nationally systemic risks (such as currency risks) may be diversifiable, meaning that international investors or regional and multilateral development banks that have exposure across countries should be in a position to help hedge these risks. 
• The most challenging category for the infrastructure investor are endogenous risks that are also systemic – e.g. government counterparty risks, where a government reneges on a contractual obligations. From an investors’ perspective, such risks cannot be diversified, at least at the national level. Multilateral development banks may be able to take on such risks, as they also have some leverage over the government in question, and can support efforts to reduce risks. In addition, as multilateral development banks have exposure across countries, they may be able to manage this risk within a diversified portfolio (for example, across several countries or currencies)—as any one loss would be compensated by returns on other investments (see also 2020 FSDR) At the same time, governments can take actions to reduce policy risks, thus lowering the cost of capital, and encouraging greater investment. 

Implications for SDG risk and resilience policies
A risk and resilience framework for the SDGs needs to account for this increasingly systemic nature of risk – traditional risk management frameworks thus need to be complemented with a risk reduction and resilience focus. Risk can never be completely eliminated, particularly in a complex and interconnected world. Nor is risk elimination desirable in all cases, since risks are often associated with opportunity and innovation, with positive impacts on sustainable development. For investors, risk management is thus about understanding, weighing and managing cost and benefit associated with activities or investments and their related opportunities and risks. 
A ‘traditional’ risk management cycle consists of:
• risk assessment (risk identification/early warning, modelling/evaluation/assessment), and
• risk treatment/management, including: reducing the probability of a shock (or avoiding risk-incurring activities altogether when possible); reducing the cost or impact of shocks; and/or sharing or transferring risk.
In a complex risk landscape, risk managers and policymakers have increasingly complemented this approach with a focus on risk reduction and resilience. For example, the Sendai Framework stresses the limitations of a hazard-by-hazard view of risk management, with a view to strengthen our ability to understand and reduce systemic risk. It expands the prevailing focus on natural hazards to include human-made, technological, environmental and biological hazards, and moves the focus from managing disaster events to managing disaster risk systemically by reducing existing risk, preventing the creation of new risk and managing residual risk. Resilience strategies, which complements traditional risk management practices, consider how to:
• strengthen systems in maintaining basic functionality through crises, and their ability to recover quickly from shocks, and to 
• learn from crises and shocks, adapt to new conditions and ‘build back better’. 
A risk/resilience framework would thus include efforts to both reduce and manage risks, including to: (i) better understand risks, (ii) prevent or reduce the likelihood of risks materializing, (iii) reduce the impact of hazards, decrease vulnerability and exposure and enhance resilience capacities, (iv) share and/or transfer risk, and (v) ‘build back better’ in recovery (see also Figure 3). These efforts must be underpinned by inclusive risk governance that engages a diverse set of stakeholders in the process.

Figure 3. 
A risk and resilience framework


Inclusive risk governance
Efforts to understand and manage risks must be informed by the concerns, interests and perceptions of all stakeholders. Stakeholder involvement improves both the quality and the legitimacy of policy action – it helps to enhance risk awareness, elicit stakeholder risk perceptions, know-how and preferences that can all inform policy action, and creates confidence in such policy action. Inclusive approaches are particularly important for complex risks, where expertise of multiple communities is required. 
There are significant governance gaps at global, regional, and country levels that act as a barrier to inclusive risk governance.  Women and other marginalised groups (e.g. people living with disabilities) are under-represented in decision-making processes at all levels. Yet, accommodating the specific needs and capacities of marginal groups are critical to reducing vulnerabilities and building resilience. They also have unique knowledge on the specific needs and risks faced by communities. Addressing these governance gaps, and building the enabling environment for women’s leadership and capacities across the SDG risk landscape will ensure the effectiveness and sustainability of disaster risk reduction and resilience action. Establishing or strengthening multi-stakeholder national disaster risk reduction platforms can significantly strengthen participatory and inclusive risk governance. At the global level, countries most vulnerable to disasters have least agency to address risk drivers, calling for more inclusive global governance mechanisms that enhance their voice and representation. 
Understanding risk
Understanding risk is the basis for risk-informed decision-making. Understanding risk includes assessing the sources of risk (e.g. hazard identification across the STEEP categories, exposure and vulnerability and capacity assessments), and their potential impacts or costs. Assessments should also consider the state of knowledge about risks – whether risks are well understood, or complex with difficult-to-identify causes and consequences, such as systemic risks. All these elements inform risk evaluation. 
Complex and systemic risks require new conceptual and analytical approaches. Technical communities – in disaster risk, finance, and other areas – use models to better “see” risk in the present or near future. Most of these models are based on historical data and observations, assuming that the past is a reasonable guide to the present and the future. In a complex world, where small changes can have large and unanticipated effects, this critical assumption no longer holds. In addition, different communities’ risk assessment methodologies and tools vary and are not easily integrated, leading to mispricing of risks, hidden risks, and risk creation. For example, many investment models do not fully integrate disaster and social risks into economic and financial risk assessment tools, while disaster risk assessments may not fully articulate the complex economic and financial impacts. 
Critical gaps in the availability, quality, comparability, and dissemination of sex, age, and disability disaggregated data (SADDD) also act as a barrier to understanding the differential impacts of hazards. Most vulnerable and marginalised groups are not visible in mainstream data; limiting gender and age responsive analysis of risks, decision-making, policy formulation and practice.
Few countries identify and assess risks in a systematic fashion and, similarly, investors often ignore sustainability risks. But tools and approaches are available to strengthen SDG risk assessments. Risk knowledge and processes are surprisingly scarce in governments. With some exceptions, most governments do not have formal risk management functions responsible for understanding, modelling, mitigating and reporting on risks in a comprehensive way. When they are in place, they are usually confined to specific threats, e.g. climate risks or disasters. At the same time, there is a wide range of frameworks and risk assessment tools from different communities that decision makers can make use of. The Inter-agency Task Force put together a selection of such tools in its guidance material on the implementation of integrated national financing frameworks (INFFs), focusing on risks relevant to sustainable financing. Public policy can also play a role in enhancing sustainability risk assessments by the private sector. For example, metrics for sustainability risk reporting and disclosure by companies, which increases transparency and better align risk perceptions with sustainable development risks, are currently incoherent and contradictory (see Chapter III.B). 
Prevention and reduction 
Investments in prevention aim to address the underlying drivers of risk, reduce the probability of shocks from occurring in the first place (when that is a possibility), reduce existing risk and avoid the creation of new risk. Such preventative measures can be applied across economic, social and environmental domains. Prevention is most relevant to risks over which agents have some influence (e.g. endogenous risks, as described in Box 2). Prevention is the first best policy intervention, and highly cost effective. But it is not always possible. In the context of investment decisions, and because of the dual nature of risk and opportunity, risk taking can be a driver of innovation. Weighing risks and opportunities is also at the heart of investment decisions (see Box 4).
Box 4 
Risk, opportunity and prevention
Investment decisions (public or private) are about whether to take on risk to pursue an opportunity. For private investors that means weighing potential risks vs. expected financial rewards, compared to other investment opportunities. For the public sector the decision is more complicated; it includes weighing financial risks against the public benefit (both positive SDG impacts and unintended negative consequences) – and then comparing the risk/reward of acting today against the cost of doing nothing (see section 2 above) or taking other actions. Either way, the decision to invest and to seek an opportunity implies a degree of “risk-taking”. The question then is about how risks that cannot be reduced can be managed.
There are suggestions in fact that rather than taking on too much risk, public actors such as multilateral development banks do not take enough risk – that there is underinvestment in areas with high risks and high potential social returns. This may reflect risk aversion on the part of these institutions and their shareholders. Yet, the public sector is already implicitly taking significant risks, even when they are not visible on current public balance sheets. The cost of taking explicit risk may be well compensated if those investments reduce risks in the future. 

Good governance and creation of enabling environments for sustainable development is an important aspect of prevention and risk reduction. Some shocks and hazards are endogenous to a country or organization – that is, they arise from its own actions, and can thus be prevented. Poor governance, policy uncertainty or political instability are such “endogenous” risk factors that policy makers can aim to reduce or prevent.  
Because of the prominent role of global systemic risks in the SDG risk landscape, many such preventative actions require global cooperation. For example, investments in climate change mitigation – renewable energy investments and investments in energy efficiency, removal of fossil fuel subsidies, adequate pricing of carbon emissions – will reduce greenhouse gas emissions and the frequency and intensity of extreme weather. As noted above, climate mitigation requires global cooperation, as is the case for many global risk drivers that are largely exogenous at the national level, such as global financial instability; antibiotic resistance; or geopolitical volatility. Poverty and inequality in different dimensions – income, wealth, gender, access to technology and resources – are other important risk drivers that operate at global, national and sub-national scales, and highlight the need for risk-informed development cooperation that tackles underlying risk drivers (see section 4.3). 
Reducing the cost (or impact) of risk  
Investing in the SDGs can enhance resilience. Vulnerability is closely linked to sustainable development and the SDGs: poverty, inequality, gender, education and health status, disability and environmental concerns are identified as determinants of household vulnerability in assessments of an extremely diverse set of risks.  Investments in health systems or strong social protection systems (which can be ramped up in times of crises) can protect households from poverty in the event of materializing risks. Investments in resilient infrastructure (including retrofitting), can reduce losses and disruptions from natural hazards. 
Improved macroeconomic management can also reduce vulnerabilities. Macroeconomic imbalances (such as current account deficits, credit-driven asset bubbles, or rapidly rising credit growth and debt levels) and financial sector fragility expose populations to risk due to external shocks. Increasing trade and financial integration of the global economy has increased contagion of shocks, and increased exposure of the real economy to financial shocks. For example, volatile international capital flows often translate into volatility in the real economy in developing countries. A lack of economic diversification, e.g. dependence on commodity exports, is another source of macroeconomic vulnerability, with resource revenues dependent on volatile global commodity prices.
Managing residual risk through risk sharing 
Risk that can be neither prevented nor reduced may sometimes be shared or transferred, through insurance and different types of risk sharing mechanisms. That includes unemployment insurance, risk-informed social safety nets,  and other types of social protection at the national level, which can support anticipatory action as well as quick recoveries from crises, preventing scarring effects and long-term consequences. It also includes private insurance. The insurance industry has always had an important role in the transfer of risk and is a centre of expertise regarding risk management in general. A right degree of insurance coverage can mitigate negative economic impacts of disasters and increase overall resilience. 
However, insurance is not a silver bullet. Insurance can be a powerful tool for risk management, but it is also an expensive one for governments that otherwise have access to sufficient sovereign financing. Insurance can also enable public and private actors to engage in risk creating behaviour, including investing in risk-prone areas, without consideration of the human costs and wider socioeconomic impacts should a disaster hit. Depending on the frequency and severity of risks to be managed, governments can combine (or layer) financing instruments that address different needs and have different cost implications: risk transfer and insurance-type mechanisms for low frequency but high severity events; contingent financing for intermediate cases, and budgetary instruments (such as reserve funds, or general contingency budgets) for high frequency but low severity events. Such an approach prioritizes cheaper sources of funding, ensuring that the most expensive instruments like insurance are used only in exceptional circumstances. Insurance-type instruments have been used to provide rapid and predictable funding to countries in the event of disasters, with mixed experiences – in the case of response to COVID-19, pandemic bonds did not succeed in releasing sufficient funding in a speedy manner. To be effective, disaster risk insurance must incentivize disaster risk reducing behaviour and include provisions to ensure companies build better from the start and build back better after a disaster. Moreover, disaster risk insurance must be part of a larger disaster risk reduction financing strategy that focused on prevention.
Risk sharing is also used to stimulate investment and share macroeconomic risks. Risk sharing instruments (e.g. guarantees, political risk insurance, and other forms of blended finance) can improve the risk/reward equation in investment decision making (see chapter III.C). Risks can also be shared or transferred at the international level through arrangements such as the international financial safety net achored by the IMF, quick-disbursing financial mechanisms in response to disasters, or financial instruments such as state-contingent debt (see chapters III.E and III.F). 
Recovery and building back better
Resilient systems are able to recover more quickly from crises, and build back better by adapting to new realities. Highly effective systems are characterized by a process of continuous ‘learning’: losses incurred during a crisis are evaluated, and lessons are considered in recovery and rebuilding efforts to improve future capabilities. For example, strengthening social protection systems or using stimulus packages to rebuild resilient infrastructure can help address the immediate crisis while building resilience to future shocks. Learning processes must be inclusive, to ensure that recovery interventions overcome rather than reinforce existing inequalities, including gender inequality.  
Large economic stimulus packages during the COVID-19 crisis and investments in recovery provide an unprecedented opportunity to transition toward risk-informed and sustainable growth and development paths.  The immediate crisis response has understandably focused on providing relief to those most affected. Stimulus spending to date has had a limited share of ‘green’ investments, focusing instead on income support. Yet some measures to stimulate the economy (e.g. relaxing environmental regulations) may raise the risks of future disasters. A subsequent phase of recovery investments provides an unprecedented opportunity, with vast stimulus of around USD 12 trillion, or 15 per cent of global GDP planned (see chapter I). A recent study suggests that investing only a tenth of this recovery investments into climate mitigation and low-carbon investments would suffice to meet carbon energy investment needs compatible with the 2015 UN Paris Agreement.

4. Risk-informed financing for sustainable development 
The goal of risk-informed financing policies is to ensure both that financing is sustainable, risk-informed and resilient, and that sustainability, risk reduction and resilience is financed. Based on the framework laid out above, this final section discusses risk-informed financing policies across the action areas of the Addis Agenda, with more detailed discussions in the respective chapters of the report. It addresses:
• Sustainable, risk-informed and resilient finance: ensuring that public budgets and (public and private) investments are financially sustainable and able to withstand shocks and do not create new risks;
• Financing for sustainability, risk reduction and resilience: mobilizing financing and investment for risk reduction and resilience;
• International cooperation: enhancing international support in meeting these objectives; and
• Development-specific financing instruments: determining their most appropriate use to support risk reduction and resilience building.
4.1. 	Sustainable and resilient finance
Public and private actors must manage risks to their balance sheets, a task that is becoming more difficult in an increasingly complex risk landscape.  The COVID-19 pandemic has revealed and highlighted weaknesses and blind spots in both public and private investment and financial management. They relate to growing systemic risks, including environmental, social and other SDG-related risks that are increasingly impacting financial outcomes, but remain underappreciated, in part due to short time horizons. 
Managing shocks to public balance sheets
Risk management is a central aspect of traditional public financial management. It aims to ensure the sustainability of public balance sheets and macro-fiscal frameworks in light of multiple fiscal risks. The primary objective is to stabilize economic activity and public service delivery in the short-run, and to promote economic growth and sustainable development over the longer term. Nonetheless, the capacity to manage fiscal risks is limited in many countries. 
COVID-19 has exposed vulnerabilities of fiscal accounts and public financial management systems the world over, which has been especially challenging for developing countries. COVID-19 has starkly illustrated the vulnerability of public finances and debt sustainability (see chapter III.E) in many countries. Developing countries in particular are exposed to a range of risks that can have significant macroeconomic and fiscal impacts, including disaster risks, commodity price volatility, and other external economic shocks. To better address these calls for: (i) better understanding and planning for such risks, including through medium term revenue strategies (MTRS); (ii) adoption of a multi-instrument approach for fiscal risk management; and (iii) risk-informed debt management, at both the national and international levels (see section x). 
To build resilience into public budgets, governments should incorporate risk analysis into planning processes , and overcome ex-post biases. Countries tend to allocate significantly more funding for crisis response than to ex ante risk reduction. This is mainly due to limited understanding of risks and options for risk reduction measures, as well as high political visibility for ex-post assistance.A risk-oriented public finance system needs to overcome this ex post bias in policy. This requires, first, a good understanding of the risk landscape and its potential impacts on public finances, e.g. through multi-hazard risk assessments carried out in the context of an integrated financing framework (INFF), as the basis for a realistic assessment of costs and benefits of different financing and policy options. Many developing countries that are faced with multiple un- or underfunded urgent sustainable development needs and will require additional international support. To overcome poor incentive structures, some countries provide targeted grants to agencies and line ministries or build in relevant budget lines in all agency budgets. Both national finance ministries and donors can use these tools or identify alternative ways to ‘earmark’ resources for investment in risk reduction.
A wide range of risks to fiscal sustainability calls for a multi-instrument approach. Risks range from disasters, financial crises and other macro-economic shocks to contingent liabilities associated with guarantees, public-private partnerships and state-owned enterprises. A range of instruments is needed to manage these, responding to the respective characteristics of risk, as there is no ‘magic bullet’ and no one single approach suffices:
• Prevention: a “balance sheet approach” to fiscal policy can help policy makers limit endogenous risks on fiscal accounts (e.g. contingent liabilities) and thus reduce the probability of fiscal shocks from materializing (see Chapter III.A). State-owned enterprises and development banks need to be transparent, with assets and liabilities that are accounted for, and effective risk management. Controls or ceilings on exposures, e.g. through limits on issuances of guarantees or liabilities, or fiscal rules for subnational governments can also help reduce fisk risks. 
• Reducing risk impact: fiscal policy can also be a tool to reduce the impact of exogenous risks outside the direct control of governments on public balance sheets – e.g. by diversifying the tax base and reducing dependence on taxing commodities, governments can reduce the cost of commodity price volatility.
• Risk transfer and risk sharing mechanisms: they include insurance (e.g. sovereign parametric disaster risk insurance, insuring public assets against disasters, reinsuring guarantees), hedging (e.g. of commodity price risk), pre-arranged credit lines with international institutions (such as the World Bank’s Catastrophe Deferred Drawdown Option), or issuance of state-contingent debt instruments (see below). The international community provides support for many of these mechanisms (see below).
• Provisions for risks that cannot be reduced or transferred, allow policy makers to manage these risks without threatening stability. For example, countries can provision for disaster risk by setting aside funds (e.g. disaster funds or budget lines) and establishing budget contingencies, a form of self-insurance. Automatic stabilizers (spending increases or tax decreases in recessions that occur without discrete policy interventions) not only smoothen the business cycle, but can also support fiscal sustainability. Such measures are most appropriate for moderate but frequent shocks. For large-scale shocks, dedicated financial assets (e.g. a stabilization fund) are more appropriate, but in exceptional circumstances such as major disasters, international support will often be indispensable.
Fiscal risk is intrinsically linked to sovereign debt management and debt sustainability. Countries borrow to mobilize resources for public spending. When borrowing is well managed, they do so at the lowest possible cost and with prudent levels of risk. There is a cost-risk trade-off: short-term debt and floating rate debt is cheaper, but usually more risky than longer-term and fixed interest debt, due to higher refinancing and interest risk. Similarly, debt issued in foreign currency may have a lower coupon or interest cost, but adds volatility to debt servicing costs due to exchange rate movements. Short-term incentives may contribute to countries issuing floating rate and/or foreign debt, which may be cheaper within the time frame most relevant for decision makers, but which create longer term debt sustainability challenges. In addition, many developing countries are unable to issue long-term local currency debt at reasonable cost because domestic financial markets are insufficiently deep – setting up challenging trade-offs, particularly in light of large unmet financing needs. Such trade-offs should be explicitly considered in a country’s debt management strategy. 
State-contingent debt instruments could increase the resilience of sovereign balance sheets. Such instruments are structured to link a country’s debt obligation to its ability to pay. They can provide insurance against risks such as commodity shocks, disasters, or deep recessions by building standstills into debt contracts. As such, they also reduce the need for complicated negotiations on debt standstills, as was the case for the Debt Service Suspension Initiative in response to COVID-19. While not widely used, state-contingent clauses have been introduced in debt contracts of some countries vulnerable to disasters (e.g. hurricane clauses), where occurrence of  a disaster automatically triggers a moratorium on debt repayments. There is strong case for more widespread use. While markets have been slow to incorporate stage contingent elements into debt issuance, due in part to high risk premiums that the market attaches to such events, the public sector could take a lead by including state-contingent elements in public sector lending (see Chapter III.E.). Insurance-type mechanisms, where countries insure a predetermined amount of debt, and related debt servicing will be paid by the insurer in case of a disaster, have also been proposed. Relying on clearly specified triggers, contractual approaches do not cover all contingencies, and are thus not a panacea.  
Resilient private business, finance and investment 
Managing risk is at the heart of investment. Private businesses and investors routinely assess risks relative to financial returns. Because risk is linked intrinsically to opportunity, the objective of their risk management is not to entirely eliminate risk, but rather to incur the ‘right amount’ of well-compensated risk, which maximizes value but remains in line with a company’s overall risk appetite. The financial sector and the insurance industry in particular are a center of expertise regarding risk-return management, due to their role in transferring risk.  
The COVID-19 pandemic has revealed underlying corporate vulnerabilities to systemic risks and underlined the importance of considering non-financial risks. Companies in sectors such as tourism and energy have been hardest hit, but the lack of corporate resilience is more widespread (see Chapter I). Major drivers of this vulnerability include high leverage, which amplifies the impact of shocks on corporate balance sheets, and complex just-in time supply chains with no redundancies built in to accommodate shocks. In both cases, an excessive focus on short-term results that unduly discounts risks and uncertainties that lie further in the future plays a role. At the same time, investor surveys indicate that COVID-19 has been perceived as a ‘sustainability crisis’, with parallels to other global systemic risks such as climate change. It may thus further increase investor focus on the material impact of climate and other environmental, social and governance (ESG) risks on financial returns. 
Financial markets are increasingly recognizing climate-related risk, but continue to underestimate other material SDG risks. Climate risks affect the vast majority of financial assets – 93 per cent of equities by market capitalisation in the US alone according to some estimates. Such risks include physical risks, such as climate-related disasters, and transition risks, related to impacts of climate policies such as carbon pricing leading to stranded assets. For major institutional investors, such risks are now too large to be diversified. To manage these risks large institutional investors have started work with the companies they invest in (e.g. through active ownership) to reduce carbon intensity, as a way to increase the resilience of their investment portfolios (see Chapter III.B). Yet, while climate risks directly impact the risk-return calculus of investors with sufficiently long-time horizons, this is not the case for all investors, nor for other SDG-related risks. Full disclosure of material SDG risks is a precondition for risk-informed behaviour. While some progress has been made with regard to the disclosure of material financial risks arising from climate change, such disclosure often remains partial, and SDG risk disclosures overall remain insufficient, as discussed below. 
Policy makers can reduce risks relevant to investors, or share them, to improve risk/return profiles of investments. Actions to reduce risks include efforts to improve the enabling environment: reducing administrative hurdles and burdens for businesses, reducing policy uncertainty and other policy risks for investment, e.g. by providing a stable macroeconomic environment. Public actors may also decide to share risks for specific investments, through financial instruments usually provided by development and climate finance institutions. They should however only take such risks on their balance sheets when investments support public policy objectives (and thus provide financing for sustainability and resilience, as discussed in the next section).  
4.2.	 Financing for sustainability and resilience 
While management of material risks is a routine, if challenging, part of financing, financing for sustainability and resilience is not. Most private investors maximize financial returns, and do not consider SDG factors unless the risks directly and materially impact profitability. They thus do not consider many investments in prevention or resilience, which many not be attractive from a financial risk/return perspective, nor the social and environmental risks created by their investments. Public actors also underfund investments in prevention and resilience – partly due to lack of knowledge, partly due to poor incentives. This leaves economies and societies vulnerable to systemic risk, and opportunities for sustainable investment overlooked. 
Public finance to enhance risk reduction and resilience 
As the risk bearer of last resort, the public sector has to consider and address the whole range of SDG investment opportunities, not only those that directly impact public budgets. Beyond the basic approach to fiscal risk management, public finance in its entirety – budgeting, tax policy, debt management and other functions – needs to be geared toward achieving the SDGs. This implies investing in risk prevention, reduction and resilience for all stakeholders, not only because of the public sector’s duty of care in its role as the custodian of the sustainable development agenda, but also because building resilience can lower a country’s cost of borrowing, which can further stimulate investment in a virtuous cycle. For example, higher vulnerability to climate risk already significantly impacts borrowing costs of sovereigns, with recent studies finding premia of 275 percentage points on sovereign bond yields of countries highly exposed to climate risk.
Public finance can be used to enhance prevention. This includes incentivizing climate mitigation, particularly for major emitters, e.g. through regulation, carbon taxes or by phasing out fossil fuel subsidies, which at around 6.3 per cent of global GDP, or USD 4.7 trillion, act as negative carbon price signals (see chapter III.A). Other relevant examples include investing in economic diversification, which reduces economic volatility.
Public finance can be a major driver in increasing economies’ and societies’ resilience – through investments in structural resilience, social protection and more equitable societies. This includes investments in structural resilience (e.g. resilient infrastructure – see Box 5 below), early warning systems that lead to early action and are locally designed, inclusive and gender responsive, and other forms of climate adaptation. Allocation of funding for such investments suffers from the above-mentioned short-term and ex post biases in policy making, which disincentivize such measures, particularly under tight fiscal constraints. Progressive tax systems and other measures that enhance equity and support the most vulnerable are further drivers of resilience. Social protection systems in particular have been a critical source of resilience, and facilitated rapid and effective responses to the COVID-19 shock in many countries (see Box 6 below).
Box 5.
Investing in sustainable and resilient infrastructure 
Infrastructure investment locks in risk and development patterns for decades. To meet climate targets and the SDGs, such investments must be fully aligned with these objectives. Estimates suggest that even if all new infrastructure had zero emissions, emissions from the existing capital stock would need to be cut in half by 2030 to limit global warming to 1.5 °C – a daunting challenge.a  Climate change is also increasingly affecting the financial and economic performance of infrastructure assets, through direct damage, rising operating and financing costs. Lack of resilience could increasingly threaten infrastructure financing at a systemic level, due to rising borrowing costs linked to country risk premia, and reduced availability of insurance.b 
Large-scale stimulus programmes in response to COVID-19 provide an unprecedented opportunity to transform infrastructure planning, design, financing and delivery, and lay the groundwork for a new development trajectory. To take advantage of this opportunity, a comprehensive approach to sustainable and resilient infrastructure is needed, building on a shared understanding of sustainable infrastructure that is economically, socially, and environmentally resilient and sustainable. Such an approach would include:
- Supportive upstream policy frameworks (including mainstreaming disaster risk and climate change considerations in all planning processes and frameworks and infrastructure plans, and policy measures such as carbon pricing) and analytical tools (such as valuation methodologies that balance off the higher upfront costs of climate resilient infrastructure and higher perceived technology risks with their lower operating costs and lower climate physical and transition risks)c; 
- Platforms for project preparation, such as SOURCEd, to scale up investment-ready sustainable infrastructure projects; 
- Enhanced quality control of projects, including standards and regulations for infrastructure resilience, and enhanced asset management to introduce climate adaptation and mitigation strategies for assetse; 
- Mobilization and alignment of finance, including additional funding from multilateral development banks, use of blended instruments to attract investors when appropriate, and efforts on the supply side, such as enhanced climate risk disclosure and sustainable investing taxonomies, as well as technical support and capacity building to develop risk-informed and resilient infrastructure projects.f
Sources
a Amar Bhattacharya, et al. 2019. Aligning G20 Infrastructure Investment with Climate Goals & the 2030 Agenda. Foundations 20 Platform. A reportto the G20.
b Global Center on Adaptation.  2021. A system-wide approach for infrastructure resilience. A technical note. January 2021
c Green Climate Fund. 2020. Tipping or turning point: Scaling up climate finance in the era of COVID-19. GCF Working paper No. 3. October 2020
d https://public.sif-source.org 
e Managing Infrastructure for Sustainable Development-A Handbook for Local and National Governments, United Nations, 2021, ch.6
f See for example the Coalition for Disaster Resilient Infrastructure (CDRI): https://cdri.world/

Box 6. 
Social protection and household resilience
Social protection systems have been the first line of defence against the negative impacts of COVID-19 on people’s health, livelihoods and incomes. With nearly 1,600 measures reported in 209 countries between February and November 2020, social protection was one of the priority responses to cushion the most adverse socio-economic effects.a Investing in social protection infrastructure during good times can support country responses during crisis. Countries that had strong social protection systems in place could more rapidly use and adapt existing schemes and delivery mechanisms to facilitate access to healthcare, ensure income security and protect jobs. 
The crisis has also laid bare major coverage gaps, especially for workers in the informal economy and their families and migrant workers, and in the comprehensiveness of protection, e.g. regarding health protection, unemployment protection or sickness benefits.b In contrast to ‘safety nets’ that often provide only patchy and limited protection, countries with universal social protection systems were able to readily use existing national administrative capacities and delivery mechanism, and allowed for  expediting of emergency cash disbursement while minimizing exclusion risks.c
From emergency response to long-term solutions
Temporary support measures introduced in the context of this crisis can be utilized as building blocks for protecting individuals beyond the current crisis and ensure preparedness for future crises. To this end, relevant national actors should be involved in the design and implementation of emergency responses and longer-term solutions. Where necessary, international financial and technical support can strengthen national capacities to provide social protection. Moving from emergency responses to long-term solutions will also require coherence with social, economic, and employment policies. Extending social protection to workers in the informal economy, for example, can reap a triple dividend: it can provide workers with economic security; and facilitate transitions to the formal economy, which would contribute to productivity gains and broaden  the tax base. Coordinating employment and social protection policies can support and sustain economic recovery, for instance by providing workers who are temporarily out of work not only with income security but also with training opportunities to enhance existing skills or reskill. c
Financing social protection floors
The latest ILO estimates suggest that additional resources needed to close the global financing gap in achieving social protection floors have increased by approximately 30 per cent since the onset of the COVID-19 crisis. To close coverage gaps, developing countries would need to invest around 3.8 per cent of their GDP on average.d Diverse financing mechanisms will be needed, based on the principle of solidarity at both national and international levels. This includes strengthening domestic resource mobilization (see Chapter III.A) and also improving efficiencies. Administrative costs are an important consideration in SPF design. For example, one African country shifted social transfer distribution from a cash system to a mobile-money-based system, which resulted in a 20 per cent drop in the variable administrative costs. However, such shifts need to address unequal access to technology and specifically, the access of key marginalised groups including women (see Chapter III.G). The ILO Social Protection Floors Recommendation, 2012 (No. 202), provides guidance on objectives to which efforts to build social protection should be oriented.c
Sources:
a ILO. 2020a. Social Protection Monitor: Social Protection Responses to the COVID-19 Crisis around the World. Available from: https://www.social-protection.org/gimi/RessourcePDF.action?id=56047.
b ILO. 2020b. Social Protection Spotlight. Various issues. Available from: https://www.ilo.org/secsoc/information-resources/publications-and-tools/Brochures/lang--en/index.htm
c ILO. 2021. Towards Solid Social Protection Floors? The Role of Non-Contributory Provision during the COVID-19 Crisis and Beyond. Social Protection Spotlight.
d Durán Valverde, Fabio, José Pacheco-Jiménez, Taneem Muzaffar, and Hazel Elizondo-Barboza. 2020. Financing Gaps in Social Protection:  Global Estimates and Strategies for Developing Countries in Light of COVID-19 and Beyond. Working paper. Geneva: International Labour Office. 

Risk-informed public finance sometimes calls for taking more risk explicitly on public balance sheets, for SDG investments that will enhance resilience and reduce risks in the long run. As noted above, commercial investors are poorly suited to finance some investments with high social returns, both because investors may find risks too large, and because they cannot appropriate sufficient returns. Public development banks and other development finance institutions have a long history of taking on such investment projects – they can manage risks on their balance sheets, and can accept lower returns because of their development mandate. As a result, they not only play a counter-cyclical role, but also invest in areas where private actors remain reluctant due to elevated risk perceptions (see Box 7 below). However, because these institutions are usually backstopped by the government, the risks they accept on their balance sheets ultimately are risks for the public sector at large. They thus need to not only pursue public policy objectives, but also be prudently managed (see 2019 FSDR for a detailed discussion on development bank governance and risk management).
Box 7. 
Public development banks and risk
There are more than 450 Public Development Banks (PDBs) in the world, distributed across every region, operating at local, national, regional, international or multilateral levels. They are significant players, providing funding of around USD 2.3 trillion annually, or 8 to 10 per cent of global public and private investments. Successful public development banks combine three attributes: (i) they are owned, controlled or supported by governments; (ii) they execute a public, development-oriented mandate, addressing market inconsistencies; (iii) They enjoy independent legal status and financial autonomy, and maintain financial sustainability.
Public development banks and SDG risks: three roles
Their development mandates and backing by the public sector allow development banks to take on macro-relevant risks. By providing counter-cyclical responses during times of crisis, public development banks can reduce countries’ exposure and vulnerability to financial crises, and ultimately crises’ development impact. This counter-cyclical role contributed to restoring financial and economic stability during the 2008/2009 global financial and economic crisis. During the COVID-19 crisis, large development banks in particular were able to provide urgent support to health systems and economic activity more generally, with some doubling their funding volumes to support the most affected sectors and businesses and maintain employment. Development banks can play this role because of their longer time horizons and more stable funding sources.
Public development banks can play a compensating and catalytic role in countries with underdeveloped financial markets. Perceived risk remains high in a number of countries, making private sector reluctant to invest. This perception is fueled by the general lack of knowledge about these markets, and by the difficulty of pricing risks accurately in the absence of sufficient market references, reporting systems on credit defaults, or independent assessments of credit risks. Development banks can fill these gaps. Multilateral development banks and climate funds can provide targeted support to public development banks operating in such countries, and in supporting the emergence of new national PDBs. More broadly, collaboration of national and multilateral banks, through capacity development, co-financing and/or on-lending arrangements, can enhance SDG-related finance through the complementarity of international resources and local market knowledge.
By providing longer-term funding than commercial banks, public development banks can better align their risk considerations with social and environmental sustainability. Governments have long used public development banks as important financing tools to implement their national economic and social policies, especially to directly finance large infrastructures, to foster economic growth and reduce poverty. More recently, many development banks also strive to crowd in private investment (domestic and international), to increase the scale and development impacts of private financial flows, and to foster capital market development, through blended finance and other forms of alternative finance.  In this latter role, they also aim to align markets with the SDGs and the Paris Agreement and to increase societal resilience, through enhanced levels of standards for all investors. They can do so through direct funding and by leading financial markets with more environmentally and socially stringent and demanding investment criteria. By aligning their operations and activities to the Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction, development banks can also ensure that their lending support risk reduction. During the Finance in Common Summit, held in Paris in November 2020, regional association of public development banks agreed on key principles for aligning their strategies with the 2030 Agenda, including in areas such as energy transitions and existing coal financing, strengthening ‘cause no harm’ policies on biodiversity, and on increasing access to affordable and accessible essential services such as education, housing or health. 

Private investment in sustainability and resilience 
The growing recognition of sustainability risks to material outcomes of corporates does not automatically translate into investment and corporate behaviour that is fully aligned with the SDGs. As discussed in section 4.1, investors increasingly recognize and address SDG risks that materially impact profitability. But many SDG risks do not impact financial returns, either because they are too far out to be considered by investors (who may have short time horizons), or because they do not impact business performance (e.g. externalities, such as the impact of plastic on the environment). Risk-informed financing policies must thus go beyond efforts to evaluate material risks, to also understand, disclose, und ultimately price or otherwise account for all other SDG risks. Only then will commercial investments internalize the impact of their activities on the SDGs; and only then will public policy incentivize investments fully aligned with the SDGs (see Chapter III.B). 
For SDG risks to be addressed, they first need to be disclosed. Countries are increasingly embedding (previously voluntary) sustainability-related disclosures (particularly for climate risks) in legislation and regulations for large corporations. Large corporations have made progress on disclosures, particularly on climate-related disclosures. Nonetheless, reporting remains fragmented, with companies reporting varying levels of data using different standards and indicators, often on a voluntary basis, which undermines both the quantity and quality of information. Corporate reporting needs to be further enhanced through norm-setting and standardization, mandatory reporting measures, and by going beyond financial material risks and to consistently address all SDG impacts (see Chapter III.B). 
Additional ‘proactive’ measures can further facilitate the low-carbon and sustainability transition in financial markets.  Beyond SDG and ESG risk disclosure, minimum standards or taxonomies for sustainable financial products can provide more clarity and certainty on sustainable investment opportunities to investors with sustainability preferences. Investment advisers could be mandated to ask clients about sustainability preferences; crisis support can be linked to ESG reporting requirements; and some Central Banks are considering integration of environmental, social and governance criteria into their portfolios to address the “tragedy of the horizon”, e.g. by considering carbon intensity in bond purchasing programmes (see also Chapters II.B and II.F).   
All public policy efforts to reduce and share investment risk must take into account economic, social and environmental risks. This is primarily a challenge of policy coherence. Efforts to improve the enabling environment must not come at the expense of social and environmental objectives. Instead, taxes, regulations and other pricing mechanisms (e.g. carbon pricing, bans of single-use products, or requirements to conduct supplier due diligence on forced labour and related social risks) should serve to internalize environmental and social risks.
Risk-sharing instruments should only be used when investments contribute to public policy objectives and SDG progress. As noted, risk-sharing instruments raise resources for investment that would not be sufficiently attractive for commercial investors without support. As they use public resources, they must be aligned with public policy goals, such as climate action and the SDGs.  Instruments include junior equity, subordinated debt and guarantees to enhance risk-return profiles for commercial investors (e.g. the Global Subnational Climate Fund, where a first loss equity investment by the Green Climate Fund leverages investment for climate action at the sub-national level); credit guarantees to local financial institutions, to cover them against losses in underserved markets; or insurance or hedging instruments to hold risks that they are better placed to manage than commercial investors – e.g. political risk insurance (see Box 8 on the role of MIGA, and Chapter III.B. of the 2020 FSDR for a detailed discussion of such instruments). Blending structures have also been used to subsidize insurance schemes to enhance resilience of smallholder farmers and households, e.g. through the Africa and Asian Resilience Disaster Insurance Scheme, which is co-funded by the InsuResilience Investment Fund. Depending on the type of risk, national or international institutions may be better placed to take on risks – risks that are systemic at the national level, such as currency risk or political risk, are better managed by international institutions that can diversify them.
Box 8.  
The market for political risk insurance
Political risk has long been an important consideration for private sector investors operating in developing countries. The ability to protect against expropriation, breach of contract by a sovereign, currency inconvertibility, and war & civil disturbance are important factors for investors with significant debt and equity positions. With 10-30 year investment horizons for large infrastructure, energy, and financial service projects, most are unable to effectively manage political risk using their own balance sheet. In response, political risk insurance offers a capital-efficient method to transfer these risks to organizations that can pool exposures from across a portfolio of countries and regions. 
The political risk insurance market is made up of three types of insurance providers: private insurers (commercial markets), export credit agencies (ECAs), and multilateral development institutions. Private insurers are profit-oriented and typically offer coverage with maximum tenors of 10-15 years and limits of USD 50-100 million per insured risk. Tenors and coverages for ECAs can vary significantly. Most ECAs operate under an explicit mandate to primarily cover investors from their country of origin. Depending on their specific mandate, ECAs are required to be financial self-sustainable. Multilateral insurers, most notably the Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency (MIGA), have an explicit development mandate and in the case of MIGA cover investments in both middle income but especially lower-income countries and fragile and conflict affected states. By doing so, MIGA acts as insurer of last resort covering risks that in complexity, risk profile, tenor and size are outside of the appetite of private markets. As a benefit of being part of the World Bank Group, MIGA is well positioned to pre-emptively address emerging political risks through direct engagement with its sovereign or sub-sovereign counterparties. This form of pre-claims management avoids lengthy arbitration and allows projects to continue to perform without disruption. Since its creation, MIGA has been able to resolve the overwhelming majority of potential political risk situations without arbitration or a claim, thereby ensuring that critical development projects continue and strengthening investor confidence in emerging markets. 
Over the last decade the market for political risk insurance has seen steady growth. MIGA for instance has increased its capacity from USD 2.5 billion in annual issuances to an average of USD 5-6 billion. Reinsurance is an important enabler of that capacity growth allowing carriers like MIGA to scale its impact across a broader set of projects and geographies. Innovation in products such as expansion into credit enhancement has further broadened access to coverages that protect investors against losses resulting from a failure of a sovereign or sub-sovereign to meet financial obligations. Continued innovation and capacity growth have significantly expanded the role and relevance of political risk insurance in de-risking investment into emerging markets. As a capital effective instrument to enable private capital flows, a wider use of political risk insurance has the potential to unlock marterial incremental investments and accelerate progress against the Sustainable Development Goals. 
Source: Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency (MIGA)


4.3.	 International support and action
Risk prevention, reduction and investments in resilience have a public good character, calling for global cooperation and international support for developing countries. Systemic risks in particular have cross-border effects, and isolated national efforts to address them will not suffice. Both climate mitigation and the COVID-19 pandemic provide stark illustrations for the need for international cooperation, and for provision of support to developing countries with limited resources, not only in the spirit of global solidarity, but also in the self- interest of advanced countries. Such international support can both directly support sustainability and resilience of public finances and financial systems, and also contribute to financing for risk reduction, resilience and sustainability. 
Supporting sustainable and resilient public finances and financial systems
International public finance can provide fiscal support in times of macroeconomic shocks, crises and disasters, and thus play a countercyclical role to enhance resilient public financing.  Multilateral development banks in particular have historically been able to provide countercyclical financing, significantly extending their operations in developing countries in response to the global economic and financial crisis in 2008 and 2009 (see the 2019 FSDR and Chapters III.C and E). They have also provided concessional financing to developing countries in need in response to the COVID-19 shock, frontloading disbursements. In contrast, some bilateral ODA providers have acted pro-cyclically by reducing aid allocations, due to fiscal pressures at home (see Chapter III.C). The international community has also set up or supports a range of quick-disbursing financing instruments that can provide rapid fiscal support in the event of a disaster or pandemic (see Box 5 below).
Financial systems have proven more resilient to the COVID-19 shock than to the global crisis in 2008 and 2009, and international financial markets have recovered quickly from the March turmoil, but many developing countries face significant liquidity pressures. Major banks had better capital and liquidity positions, allowing them to absorb the macroeconomic shock rather than to amplify it. Nonetheless, other fault lines have emerged, particularly in the non-bank financial sector, which has become a major source of systemic risks, and warrants continued attention by regulatory policy makers (see Chapter III.F). At the same time, many developing countries have faced liquidity pressures due to the current crisis, as they remain vulnerable to the ebbs and flows of cross-border financial flows. Strengthening the global financial safety net and increasing IMF capacity for concessional lending and to provide liquidity support, e.g. through a substantive issuance of Special Drawing Rights, remain a priority (see Chapter III.F).
International cooperation and support for sustainability and resilience
Strengthened international cooperation is also required for investments in risk reduction and resilience, which remain severely underfunded. It is a shared interest of all countries to spend more and to spend better on global risk prevention and preparedness, and to address the increasingly systemic nature and unequal distribution of risk, while also supporting national efforts for risk reduction in developing countries. But such investments are often crowded out by more immediate short-term or domestic concerns, because of their ‘global public good’ character. Pandemic preparedness and climate change mitigation are two examples of such global public goods – they affect all or most countries and people, and cannot be provided by any one country alone, but rather require global cooperation. This entails not just additional financing, but also strengthened and more inclusive global governance. 
More public investment is needed. Investment in pandemics preparedness and response has been insufficient, despite increased mobilisation after the 2014-2016 Ebola crisis. Despite efforts by entities such as the Coalition for Epidemic Preparedness Innovations, Gavi, the Vaccine Alliance, WHO and others, investments in research and development for vaccines and other preventative interventions remain a small share of overall health spending globally, and continue to be characterized by a cycle of ‘panic and neglect’. Markets dramatically underinvest in this area. The COVID-19 crisis highlights the enormous output losses associated with slow global vaccination progress and makes a clear case for greater public investment, including in COVAX, the vaccines pillar of the ACT-Accelerator. And while total public climate finance provided by developed countries has increased in recent years, to reach USD 63 billion in 2018 (see Chapter III.C), it pales in comparison to the vast investment needs for transitioning the global economy on to a low-carbon path.  Developed countries’ commitments made under the 2015 Paris agreement to transfer resources to finance objectives beyond mitigation, including adaptation, regulations, information-sharing, and technology transfer, must also be met. Such transfers are critical to accelerate policies supporting decarbonization in developing countries.
Beyond additional funding, the international architecture should be revisited. Systemic risks are characterized by cross-domain effects. As a result, they do not fall within the responsibility of a single organization, neither nationally, nor at the global level. Increasing voice of most vulnerable groups and countries – those with least agency to reduce global risks but most vulnerable to shocks and disasters – is a second imperative. International cooperation must be further strengthened in these two dimensions, but both are challenging to address, as they require bringing together different communities of expertise and practice, and overcoming significant power imbalances. They require a ‘reinvigorated multilateralism’, as recognized by UN Member States in the Declaration on the commemoration of the 75th anniversary of the United Nations,  with a strengthened United Nations at its centre, due to its its convening power and capacity to address sustainable development, climate, peace and security and humanitarian considerations in a coherent, complementary and collaborative manner. 
Development cooperation can also support developing countries in addressing risk and building resilience, including by strengthening national capacities and country systems that are able to respond to shocks and crises. Government capacity has been a key determining factor of the effectiveness of countries’ response to the COVID-19 pandemic. Development cooperation has a key role to play in building such capacities, e.g. in national health systems, social protection systems, or crisis response systems. INFFs could serve as a tool to align such support with national priorities and needs. 
Support for national pandemic preparedness increased after 2015, but remains insufficient. The Joint External Evaluation (JEE) mechanism, set up by the WHO in 2016, allowed for identification of critical gaps in preparedness. Yet, despite the low cost of enhancing pandemic preparedness (estimated at less than 2 dollars per person per year to reach acceptable levels), recipient country expectations for additional support after JEE gap assessments have not been fully met. Resilient national health systems are a second line of defence. Development cooperation continues to play an important role in this area, responsible for almost a third of health spending in low-income countries, but specific support for health system strengthening, which is the basis for crisis preparedness and response, remains limited, at around 15 per cent of overall support for health. 
Climate adaptation and disaster risk reduction remain severely underfunded. Annual adaptation financing needs are estimated to range between USD 140 to 300 billion annually by 2030. Yet, such investments in the adaptive capacity of vulnerable populations, including women, girls, and people living with disabilities, are even more underfunded than other global priorities, such as climate mitigation. Reporting on official international support for disaster risk reduction also remains inconsistent, despite the introduction of the OECD-DAC disaster risk reduction marker. Climate adaption and disaster risk reduction activities face a dual challenge – they rely more on global solidarity than mitigation finance, which is in the direct interest of all countries, and they tend to rely more on public finance, as they are often not associated with revenue streams. Participatory and tailored approaches are particularly important in climate adaption and disaster risk reduction projects, so that they can respond to the specific needs of vulnerable local populations. 
Quick-disbursing financing mechanisms can further support rapid and effective national crisis response. The Ebola crisis has spurred development of pandemic emergency financing facilities, building on experiences from the climate and disaster world. Such quick-disbursing mechanisms can provide rapid and predictable financing, and are thus a useful complement to domestic funding and other forms of international support. However, not all mechanisms have stood the test of COVID-19, providing important lessons for their effective design (see Box 9). 
Box 9.  
Quick-disbursing financing mechanisms and risk-transferring instruments
The international community has developed a range of mechanisms – quick-disbursing grant or debt financing, contingent instruments, and insurance mechanisms – to support countries in their response to economic and non-economic shocks and disasters. This includes the set of bilateral and multilateral arrangements and institutions that comprise the global financial safety net (see above and Chapter III.F.), as well as disaster financing mechanisms for humanitarian emergencies and for disasters that are growing in frequency and intensity due to climate change. In response to the 2014-2016 Ebola outbreak, the latter were expanded and complemented to also cover pandemics. 
Instruments include: 
- Grant or loan financing provided in the immediate aftermath of disasters, e.g. pooled funds such as the United Nations Central Emergency Response Fund (CERF), which includes rapid response grants; IDA’s Contingency Emergency Response Components and Crisis Response Windows, or contingent credit lines such as the World Bank’s Catastrophe Deferred Drawdown Option (CAT-DDO); the WHO Contingency Fund for Emergencies; or the IMF Catastrophe Containment and Relief Trust. 
- Risk financing and risk transfer instruments, which include regional risk sharing or risk pooling mechanisms such as the Caribbean Catastrophe Risk Insurance Facility (CCRIF) and the African Risk Capacity, and instruments to transfer risk, such as the insurance window of the World Banks’ Pandemics Emergency Financing Facility, also known as pandemic bonds. 
Their primary purpose is to provide rapid and predictable financing that reaches countries and populations in need early enough to avoid or minimize long-term consequences and scarring. They can provide governments with needed liquidity for immediate response and recovery. In comparison to costly self-insurance, these international efforts aim to provide support to resource-constrained developing countries that is rapid, predictable and less fragmented than traditional support, and also allow for risk pooling and hence taking advantage of diversification of risk across geographies. 
Several lessons have emerged from their use over recent years. First, insurance schemes and associated premiums raise equity concerns – the most vulnerable (households and countries) will not afford them. Existing parametric insurance schemes and catastrophe bonds are expensive, with annual premiums estimated at 1.5 – 3.2 times of expected annual payouts for SIDS, due to geographical risk correlations and thin insurance markets. Concerns over premium costs have halted countries from joining regional risk sharing mechanisms. In some cases, donors have covered these premiums, and initiatives such as the Global Risk Financing Facility provide technical and financial support for risk financing and insurance mechanisms. 
Second, parametric instruments and their triggers in particular can be challenging to structure, and private sector involvement overly costly. In the case of pandemic bonds, pay-outs were possible only more than three months into the pandemic, and thus came after the World Bank had committed funding to fight COVID-19 – a slower response than traditional support, at higher cost. Parametric triggers have worked better when risks are well understood (as is the case for hurricanes covered by CRIFF), and parametric triggers are immediate. 
Third, financing instruments should include both incentives and capacity building efforts for investments in planning, improving data and tracking systems, preparedness and prevention. 

2022 FSDR - Chapter 2
II. Overcoming the ‘Great Finance Divide’

1 Introduction

Fiscal constraints in developing countries are driving a widening ‘pandemic recovery gap’ that threatens achievement of the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs). Developed countries have been financing a large-scale response the COVID-19 pandemic at historically low interest rates. Many developing countries – faced with significantly higher borrowing costs in, and intermittent access to, international financial markets – have been more hamstrung in their response. This so-called ‘great finance divide’ contributed to developing countries’ diminished ability to finance an appropriate response to a historic shock. If left unaddressed, it will further exacerbate the divergence in development prospects, and pandemic scarring will fatally undermine achievement of the SDGs. 

Debt financing enables countries to respond to emergencies such as the pandemic and to fund long-term investments in climate action and the SDGs. But if not used well, it can constrain policy space down the line and jeopardize financial stability. Sovereign borrowing allows governments to ramp up spending and provide assistance during a crisis, when private actors may be unable to do so. It allows countries to invest in the future when productive investment opportunities, which support the public good, arise. Such investments can help achieve public policy objectives and increase the tax base and capacity to service debt over time. But benefits can be sustained only if risks are managed carefully, and resources used effectively. Rapid build-ups in debt often end in financial crises. The challenge is to increase access to long-term, affordable and stable financing, and to use proceeds productively so that public policy goals are achieved and fiscal capacity is enhanced. 

Without addressing financing gaps, countries may forego productive investments to meet economic, social and environmental needs, which is undesirable for reasons of both equity and efficiency. Debt financing is most appropriate for investments that generate direct returns and/or enhance a country’s fiscal capacity over relevant time horizons, e.g. infrastructure investments. Such investments in sustainable development should find funding from investors with sufficiently long-time horizons, such as pension funds and/or public development banks; but for a variety of reasons, they currently do not. Other forms of public spending may not directly enhance fiscal capacity and are unlikely to be funded by commercial investors, even in the long run, but may be indispensable to avert large costs (climate action), eradicate poverty, or achieve gender equality or other SDGs. These are priorities that the international community has committed to support, and that should find funding from concessional sources. 

To reverse divergence in recovery and achieve the SDGs, countries will need reliable access to affordable financing, from concessional and non-concessional (public, private, domestic, and international) sources. A package of measures can help developing countries mobilize affordable long-term financing, and spend them effectively to achieve policy objectives: 
• spending mobilized resources effectively on shared priorities is a precondition for translating additional financing into development impact and enhanced fiscal capacity to service debt; this includes strengthening public investment efficiency and good governance more broadly; it also includes linking investment and development partner support to country-owned medium-term plans, e.g. through an Integrated National Financing Framework (INFF); 
• mobilize additional public financing for investment in public policy priorities, such as raising domestic resources (see Chapter III.A); public development banks can play an important role, given their ability to lend long-term and countercyclically at affordable rates;
• reduce borrowing cost and pro-cyclical volatility of borrowing from commercial sources through domestic actions to reduce risks and strengthen the enabling environment, and international efforts to reduce volatility in global markets; improvements in the information ecosystem, including longer-term ratings and debt sustainability assessments; and exploiting the growing interest in sustainability issues to reduce borrowing costs; and
• address debt overhangs to reduce debt burdens and free resources for investment in climate action and the SDGs. 

These actions cut across the action areas of the Addis Agenda. Some of the detailed analysis and recommendations, as well as key complementary actions, are covered throughout the chapters of the report and referenced below. 

2 The great finance divide 

Developing countries are confronted with financing at higher cost, shorter maturities, and greater volatility. The pandemic exacerbated differentiated abilities of countries to respond to the pandemic and invest in climate action and the SDGs (section 2.1.). This divergence is at least in part due to financing conditions. A range of factors, including investor perceptions and uncertainty over their repayment capacity, and structural challenges and constraints mean that developing countries pay elevated risk premia in markets and face debt sustainability concerns at lower levels of debt (section 2.2.). Exploring some of the underlying drivers of this financing divide (section 2.3.) helps inform the policy recommendations laid out in the third part of the chapter. 

2.1 A constrained response to the pandemic; limited ability to invest in climate action and the SDGs

A divergent pandemic response 

The outbreak of COVID-19 delivered a seismic shock to the global economy, but developed countries were able to respond with aggressive macroeconomic policies. The pandemic triggered a contraction in consumption, investment, employment, and income at unprecedented speed (see Chapter I). Policy makers in developed countries responded in an aggressive and in some respects unprecedented way to mitigate social and economic impacts. They delivered fiscal support at massive scale and backstopped fiscal measures through aggressive and unconventional monetary policy. This macro-policy response achieved its intended short-term objectives. Household incomes and financial markets in developed countries stabilized. For example, there are indications that poor households in particular benefited from fiscal support in the United States, in marked contrast to the recovery from the global financial crisis a decade earlier.  

Developing countries were more constrained in their policy response. Fiscal and monetary policy responses were dependent on national circumstances and policy space, as well as on international support provided. But on average, and compared to developed countries, they were more restrained: a more limited fiscal response and more limited monetary accommodation to support fiscal policies. In middle-income countries, fiscal policy was supportive, if at smaller scale than in developed countries, and is being withdrawn earlier in some countries due to tight borrowing constraints.  In least developed countries (LDCs), fiscal policy remained much more limited, despite international support. On the monetary policy side, many developing country Central Banks lowered interest rates and reserve requirements, with some adopting unconventional measures for the first time. But their interventions were smaller in scale and shorter in duration than in developed countries, due to concerns over currency depreciations, inflation, and capital outflows.  (see Chapter I).

This more limited response, along with a lack of vaccine availability, has led to a more protracted crisis in developing countries, with large and potentially long-term ramifications on SDG prospects. Despite the support the international community did provide, foregone economic losses from the pandemic compared to pre-pandemic projections are much larger in developing countries than in developed countries. These differences are projected to persist over the medium term, translating into major setbacks to sustainable development prospects, in health, employment, gender equality and the fight against poverty. As a result, unmet financing needs for the SDGs have further increased with a worsening baseline, with estimates of a 20 per cent increase in spending needs for key SDG sectors.  

Long-term investments in climate action and the SDGs

The contrasting pandemic response is mirrored in divergent rates of investment and capital spending. In major developed economies, fiscal responses to the pandemic have focused on supporting and shaping the recovery – e.g. in the context of the US infrastructure legislation, and the European Union’s Next Generation EU recovery plan.  These public investment packages, which are (potentially) large in scale, emphasize sustainability and climate action. For example, the Next Generation EU Recovery and Resilience Facility is expected to provide loans and grants of over EUR 700 billion for EU members’ public investments through 2026. In sharp contrast, poor countries had to reprioritize public expenditures and cut spending in areas critical to long-term sustainable development. While the G20 Debt Service Suspension Initiative (DSSI) and other forms of multilateral and bilateral support provided them with important breathing space, allowing for additional COVID-19 related expenditure, capital spending among the 43 participating countries fell by 1.1 percentage points on average in 2020, and is projected to remain below pre-crisis levels in 2021. Investment in education fell as well.  Total investment rates in developing countries are not projected to return to pre-pandemic levels over the next two years, in contrast to developed countries,  with investment recovery particularly subdued in LDCs (see Chapter II). 

Yet, SDG and climate progress requires a significant scaling up of investments. Public capital stocks have been deteriorating across income groups (with some notable exceptions) over the last 30 years, due to falling public investment ratios. Additional investments needed to achieve the SDGs and climate targets are large: in core infrastructure such as roads, electricity, water and sanitation, they amount to around 2.7 per cent of GDP in middle-income countries and 9.8 per cent of GDP in LDCs and other low-income countries through 2030.  Public investments to reach net zero emissions alone are estimated at around 2 per cent of GDP annually over the next decade.     

Such SDG investments require access to long-term financing. Financing constraints stand in the way of a ‘big push’ investment drive for recovery, SDG progress and climate action. This investment push will need to include both public and private investment. Private investment is more appropriate for some sectors and investments than others, particularly those that offer competitive risk-adjusted financial returns. Yet the cost of borrowing for private investment is not independent of those of sovereigns (the so-called “sovereign ceiling”, see Chapter III.B), so that a high sovereign borrowing not only affects public investment; it can also reduce the attractiveness of otherwise investable or “bankable” projects for private investors. Without addressing financing gaps, countries will forego investments with high social returns, which are critical for achieving the SDGs: 
• Many productive investments in physical capital and infrastructure have positive financial returns, but long gestation periods. They should thus find financing from investors with sufficiently long-time horizons, such as pension funds and/or public development banks (see Chapter III.B and C). Investments in green infrastructure also have large output and employment multipliers, and thus significant co-benefits for sustainable development. 
• Other investments may not have expected direct financial returns associated to them, but may still stimulate economic growth and enhance fiscal capacity over the medium to long term. Public investments in health and education for example not only impact individual welfare, but also growth prospects (although over long time horizons of 15 years or more).  These will likely need public financing.
• Other investments may not directly enhance fiscal capacity, even in the long run, and may never deliver financial returns. But they may still have large social returns, be indispensable to avert large costs (climate action), and/or deliver on shared global priorities such as poverty eradication, gender equality, climate mitigation and the SDGs at large – priorities that the international community has committed to support. 

2.2 Costs and terms of capital 

Developing countries are typically faced with a relatively high cost of capital. In the low interest environment of recent years, the average interest cost of outstanding sovereign debt in developed countries fell to around 1 per cent. The average cost for developing countries is significantly higher. LDCs, which have access to concessional lending, have increasingly tapped international markets in recent years, dragging up their average borrowing cost, and worsening their debt dynamics. For example, in 2021, African and LDCs sovereign Eurobonds were issued with yields above 5 per cent, and yields in 40 per cent of African bonds exceeded 8 per cent. While debt service burdens in developed countries remain low, even at high levels of debt, developing countries, including some of the most vulnerable among them, dedicate a large and growing share of their fiscal resources to servicing public debt (see Figure ‎II.1a). 

Figure ‎II.1a
Average interest cost of outstanding government debt 
(median, in per cent)

Source: Volz, Ulrich and Damon Aitken. 2022. Public Debt in the Time of Covid-19 and the Climate Crisis. Background Paper for the 2022 Financing for Sustainable Development Report. Figure compiled with data from IMF and IIF



Figure ‎II.1b
Debt stocks and debt servicing costs

Source: IMF WEO data, DESA staff calculations

Figure ‎II.1c
Developing country Eurobond issuance by yield group 
(per cent of total volume)

Source: Volz and Atkin. 2022. Figure compiled with data from Refinitv Datastream (January 2022).

Many developing countries still face limitations in issuing long-term domestic debt. Domestic debt now accounts for almost half of total debt of all developing countries (up from less than a third 20 years ago). In total, developing countries are increasingly relying on savings from domestic residents to finance deficits, though the share remains significantly lower for least developed and low-income countries.  But ‘original sin’ – the idea that many countries are unable to raise long-term funding in their domestic currency – has not been fully ‘redeemed’. Many LDCs in particular are still left with suboptimal choices – either to borrow at short maturities domestically, usually from the banking sector (which creates maturity mismatches when financing long-term investments and increases the risk of sovereign banking sector nexus in the event of a crisis), or in foreign currency in international markets (creating currency mismatches for national investments that do not necessarily generate foreign exchange earnings).  More generally, issuing domestic debt, that is in local currency and/or under domestic law, remains more expensive for countries that are perceived as high risk (including as measured by low credit ratings).  This also applies to developed countries – in the Eurozone, sovereign bonds issued under foreign jurisdiction trade at a premium for borrowers perceived ‘high risk’.  

Investors have historically demanded sizeable compensation for investing in foreign currency sovereign debt. While developing countries have reduced reliance on such foreign currency borrowing in recent years, many still face difficulty issuing long-term debt domestically (see below). Yet, foreign currency borrowing is expensive. Over the last 200 years, the average annual return of foreign currency debt to investors has been around 7 per cent, after accounting for losses from defaults. This exceeded the ‘risk free’ return on US and UK bonds by an average of 4 percentage points (in finance terms, the credit spread, or additional cost of finance for Eurobond issuances is 4 per cent).  

Returns for investors have been greater since the mid-1990s in the period of bond financing, compared to returns from bank loans that dominated prior to that. Following the Brady plan in the late 1980s, which securitized bank loans into tradeable securities, developing country sovereign borrowing shifted from commercial bank loans to bond issuances. Since 1995, total returns to investors (net of losses from defaults) have averaged almost 10 per cent – a historical high, with a credit spread of around 6 percentage points over the risk-free rate. To put this spread into context, external sovereign bonds are the best performing asset class, outperforming other asset classes such as equities or corporate bonds.  This is true even when adjusted for risk (measured by short-term volatility of secondary market prices).  Foreign currency bonds more than compensate investors for the risks they face, even through a period of repeat financial turmoil in developing countries. High investor returns equal high borrowing costs for countries.  This raises the question of how much investor “excess returns” has cost developing countries, and to what extent “excess borrowing costs” have contributed to debt crises. 

High spreads on foreign currency bonds reflect perceptions of high default risk; such perceptions can sometimes become self-fulfilling. Sovereign spreads represent investors’ default risk perceptions, primarily determined by country fundamentals. A deterioration in global financing conditions can change risk perceptions and sometimes trigger liquidity crises even in countries that had a sustainable debt trajectory and are solvent. At that point, borrowing costs could rise sharply, and default expectations can become ‘self-fulfilling’.  

2.3 Underlying drivers of limited policy space

Improving financing terms calls for addressing underlying macroeconomic constraints. More expensive and more intermittent access to financing has constrained developing countries’ macro-policy response to Covid, and limits fiscal space to invest in climate action and the SDGs. These more challenging financing conditions are linked to a whole host of factors, including institutional and governance quality, rate and resilience of economic growth, the state of public finances and external balances, and monetary flexibility. Macroeconomic constraints – the focus of this chapter – play an important role; addressing these will be key to increasing developing countries’ fiscal and monetary policy space. 

The aggressive macro-policy response in developed countries reflects a broader shift in the ‘conventional wisdom’ of macroeconomic policy that preceded the pandemic. With ultra-low interest rates unable to avert a slow recovery from the 2008 and 2009 global financial crisis, conventional monetary policy had appeared increasingly toothless. This led to several key shifts : 
• unconventional monetary policies, such as quantitative easing, and a blurring of the boundaries between fiscal and monetary policies ; 
• a reappraisal of the role of fiscal policy, in what some have called a ‘new fiscal consensus’, which accepts that macroeconomic policy measures are needed to support aggregate demand in light of weak private sector demand; that the onus is on fiscal policy to do so as monetary policy is exhausted at the zero lower bound; and that additional fiscal support is feasible as debt remains sustainable even at higher levels in a low interest environment ;
• in parallel, policy makers pay growing attention to the links between traditional objectives of macroeconomic policy and broader sustainable development considerations, like inequality and climate change. Inequality has become a central concern in this regard, identified as one of the drivers of growing household indebtedness and depressed aggregate demand.  There are calls for a significant scaling up of public investments in physical and social infrastructure, climate adaptation and mitigation.   Both inequality and climate change also came into the focus of Central Banks, for example (see Chapter III.F and previous editions of the FSDR).  

But there are limits to how well this new-found flexibility ‘travels’ to developing countries, due to underlying constraints that translate into less policy space; rising inflation also puts it into question in developed countries. Fiscal space is more limited in many developing countries because debt sustainability concerns tend to arise at lower levels of debt than in developed countries. In addition to the general challenges assessing countries’ solvency noted above, developing countries tend to have less flexibility to adjust their fiscal stance in crises, and there is more volatility and uncertainty over their growth prospects and interest costs.  Greater dependence of many developing countries on foreign savings and foreign currency borrowing further exacerbates vulnerability and uncertainty, as it makes countries more vulnerable to the global financial cycle and sudden stops. Together with often less well anchored inflation expectations, this can limit monetary policy space (see Box ‎II.1 for details). As inflationary pressures continue to rise, with global inflation rising to over 5 per cent in 2021 (see Chapter I), and central banks have started to tighten their policy stances in response, rising borrowing costs may also become a more pressing concern in developed countries again. 

Box ‎II.1
Limits to fiscal and monetary policy space 

Fiscal space and debt sustainability 
Fiscal space is limited even at comparatively lower levels of debt for many developing countries. Assessments of sovereign debt sustainability focus on public debt trajectories over the near to medium term, under reasonable growth and policies assumptions, and how those trajectories are affected by different shocks.  A stable trajectory requires that primary balances (the difference between public revenue and public expenditure other than interest payments on debt) are sufficient to cover debt service, or interest on the existing debt stock. Debt trajectories are thus driven by the fiscal policy stance (primary balances), and the interest rate-growth differential. Because developing countries tend to have less ability to adjust their fiscal policy stance, and face greater uncertainty over future growth and interest rates, they are faced with higher default risk. 
• Primary balances are more challenging to adjust. Public non-interest expenditure represents a smaller share of GDP in poorer countries. This is for two reasons: first, their public budgets are comparatively much smaller. Second, developing countries dedicate a larger share of their public budgets to interest payments on average. They need to make a larger effort for an equivalent (in GDP terms) adjustment of their primary balance. LDCs for example, mobilize only half as much revenue as a share of GDP as developed countries, but spend a three times larger share of that revenue on interest payment. They would have to increase the primary balance by 10 per cent to achieve an adjustment of 1 percentage point of GDP, more than twice the effort that would be required for the average developed country.  Observed primary balances are more stable in developing countries, hinting at the difficulty of adjusting them through the business cycle.  
• There may also be a greater level of uncertainty around primary balances. Greater vulnerability to external shocks, disasters, higher political risk, or volatility of terms of trade may all translate into more volatile fiscal balances. Lower levels of debt transparency and large contingent liabilities, which increase uncertainty around ‘true primary balances’, can also contribute, and lead to increased risk premia (see also Chapter III.E.).  
• Interest-growth differentials have become less favourable.  Developing countries on average grow faster than developed countries.  LDCs and other LICs in particular also benefit from access to concessional finance, leading to more advantageous interest-growth differentials – their capacity to service debt has grown faster than interest that accrues on it. However, over the last decade with increased market access, their cost of borrowing has increased. While primary deficits, though volatile, stayed in line with historical averages prior to the pandemic, rising borrowing costs and lower growth rates became a major driver of debt increases.  This is in marked contrast to developed countries, which have benefited from near-zero interest rates. 
• Developing countries also have more volatile interest-growth differentials, further increasing uncertainty.  Interest rates are volatile due to more shallow financial markets, and due to reliance on foreign savings and foreign currency borrowing, which makes debt stocks and interest costs vulnerable to exchange rate movements. This volatility is pronounced in periods of financial stress – countries that issue reserve currencies are much less likely to see interest rates spike (safe havens may even see interest rates fall during a crisis). This can lead to sharp increases in risk premia in developing countries. 

Monetary policy space
The ability to ease monetary conditions may be limited due to poorly anchored inflation expectations, weak fiscal positions, shallow financial markets and vulnerability to capital outflows. Developing countries, and LDcs in particular, are much more vulnerable to external price shocks. Approximately three quarters of the variability of core inflation rates in low-income countries can be explained by external shocks, e.g. those emanating from volatile global energy and food prices.  As a result, inflation rates are less stable, and inflation expectations less well-anchored. Underdeveloped financial markets may also impede monetary policy transmission channels – policy rates may not be passed on effectively to market participants, e.g. because of market segmentation, dollarization, or limited financial inclusion. All these factors can limit monetary policy space and effectiveness. A weak fiscal position and vulnerability to capital outflows further exacerbate this challenge. 

These challenges are heightened in those developing countries reliant on foreign savings, and that issue debt in foreign currency. Lowering policy rates will put downward pressure on exchange rates (for countries with floating rates). Depreciations will in turn increase debt service costs on foreign currency denominated debt. Central Banks’ ability to act as a lender of last resort in their domestic markets, providing loans to domestic financial institutions when market financing dries up, is also constrained. Foreign currency reserves may not suffice to repay creditors at short notice, potentially triggering currency and banking crises. More generally, developing countries that need to service and rollover foreign currency debt and finance imports, including health-related imports in the context of the pandemic, are vulnerable to volatility in international capital markets. Such vulnerabilities have increased as external debt stocks as a percentage of exports of goods and services and primary income have steadily risen over the last decade across developing countries.

International capital flows are driven by global factors beyond the control of developing countries to a significant degree. Global liquidity conditions, and related risk aversion or risk appetite are an important driver of gross capital flows. Portfolio equity and portfolio debt flows into different regions and countries are highly correlated with each other and with global factors, such as growth and real interest rates in developed countries and risk aversion and uncertainty in global markets.  Such  global factors have become more important determinants of capital flows compared to domestic factors over the last decade, such that “keeping one’s own house in order is necessary but not sufficient for sustainable capital flows in the new world order”.  And liquidity problems, be they triggered by domestic conditions or a sudden stop linked to global developments – such as in the early phases of the pandemic – can quickly turn into solvency challenges. An increase in risk premia and borrowing costs, e.g. due to decreasing global risk appetite and lower global liquidity, can become ‘a self-fulfilling prophecy’ and turn a liquidity challenge into a solvency crisis and default. This exacerbates both debt sustainability risks and constrains developing countries’ monetary policy space.  

3 A multi-faceted policy response

Achieving the SDGs will require access to affordable, long-term and stable sources of financing, and their effective use. Financing can come from public sources – development banks, bilateral providers – or from markets. The former are well placed to fund SDG investments because of shared objectives and long time horizons, and will thus need to be a primary source. The latter have scale, but are more short-term oriented and demand high risk premia from developing countries. Tapping global savings for SDG investments thus requires addressing underlying drivers of the high cost of capital for developing countries, such as uncertainty and information gaps, volatility in global markets and systemic risks, and short-term incentives. Enhanced access to finance alone will not, however, achieve the desired impact if resources are not used effectively; efforts to reinforce transparency, accountability, risk management and good governance at large must be commensurate to the scaling up of financing, so that public policy goals are achieved and fiscal capacity is enhanced. 

Policy options below aim to enhance from provision of additional financing from official sources and markets on favourable terms that reduce cost and volatility, address debt overhangs where needed, and ensure that resources mobilized are spent effectively for shared priorities. They aim to address the lack of funding, reduce developing country borrowing costs through national and global actions, and lower vulnerability to external shocks and capital flow volatility that further constrain their macroeconomic policy space. They are clustered in four areas: 
i. spending mobilized resources effectively and in line with shared priorities;
ii. public finance provision and the role of public development banks; 
iii. access to commercial financing at better terms, including both national and global efforts; and
iv. addressing debt overhangs.  

These policy options can address both ‘efficiency’ and ‘equity’ issues. In part they address inefficiencies in both policymaking and in markets – strengthening institutional and policy frameworks; information gaps and transparency; addressing investor time-horizons; and gaps in the international policy architecture to lower volatility and uncertainty. But enhanced efficiency alone with not suffice – financing gaps are too large, particularly in countries with limited fiscal capacities. Closing these is an equity issue – it requires mobilization of additional concessional finance for shared priorities such as climate action and the SDGs. 

The focus of these options is broadly on debt, in light of the specific challenges of the current moment laid out above. But debt financing cannot be seen in isolation. It is intrinsically linked to countries’ macrofiscal and budget frameworks, and their revenue strategies, as well as all other action areas of the Addis Agenda. The remainder of the report addresses these in detail, and provides relevant recommendations – particularly on: domestic resource mobilization (Chapter III.A.), which provides the long-term revenue base for servicing debt; private finance and investment (Chapter III.B.), which is a key complementary or even primary source of financing and investment in key SDG and climate priority areas; and different types of international concessional finance (III.C.).

3.1 Good governance and effective use of proceeds	

Achieving the efficiency and equity objectives laid out above will depend on how effectively mobilized resources are used, and on carefully managing associated risks. Equitable and sustainable growth provides the basis for revenue mobilization, reduced reliance on foreign savings, and achievement of development objectives in the long run. Higher growth rates also improve debt dynamics – if growth exceed interest rates, public debt becomes sustainable at higher levels. Debt financing can support recovery and growth, but it is no silver bullet. Rapid build-ups in debt often end in crises. About 50 per cent of ‘debt booms’ – periods of significant increases in debt-to-GDP ratios – have been accompanied by financial crises.  For additional debt financing (or debt relief) to translate into positive long-term outcomes, risks have to be carefully managed, and resources used well. 

Access to more -- and more diverse -- sources of debt financing increases the burden on debt managers to carefully manage risk. Despite improvements, debt management capacity in some countries has not kept pace with the rising complexity of the financing landscape. This endangers countries’ ability to effectively manage the trade-off between the cost of borrowing and associated risk of financial instruments. Medium-term debt management strategies can help countries meet their financing requirements, including those associated with investments in recovery, climate action and SDGs, and to manage their debt portfolios in a prudent manner.  

Transparency is a precondition for effective debt management. Data gaps undermine countries’ ability to effectively manage their debt, and for borrowers and their creditors to assess the sustainability of debt. Enhancing debt transparency, and related capacities of developing countries, has been a key focus of the international community, but important gaps remain. Closing these coverage gaps, e.g. in relation to state-owned enterprises, or on terms and conditions of lending, becomes a high priority when the demands on public financing increase in the context of a crisis response, or an expansion of public investment (see Chapter III.E). 

Scaling up of financing must be accompanied by commensurate efforts to improve governance more broadly. Governance challenges often stand in the way of financial resources and policies being effectively translated into desired development outcomes. Measures of quality of governance – rule of law, absence of corruption, quality of institutions – are important determinants of long-term growth prospects of countries, and thus also of their capacity to carry debt.  The effective management of public resources is a central aspect of good governance. Lack of transparency and accountability, corruption and misuse of public financing undermine public trust in the state; at grand scale, corruption will have significant negative fiscal and macroeconomic implications. Reducing corruption on the other hand has been associated with higher tax revenue generation, substantively enhancing countries’ fiscal capacity.  

Sources of financing and their terms should match the characteristics of investments or spending they are used for. Debt financing is most likely to be appropriate for projects and investments that generate direct returns and/or enhance a country’s fiscal capacity over relevant time horizons, e.g. infrastructure investments. Other SDG priority areas, such as health and education, require increases in recurrent spending, and, accordingly, sustained increases in domestic revenues.  

The efficacy of additional public investments also depends on strengthened infrastructure governance and related PFM processes. Public investment efficiency is a key determinant of its growth and debt sustainability impacts, but evidence suggests that efficiency gaps are sizeable. On average, more than a third of resources is lost in the public investment process (when compared to best performers), with wide variations between countries. The quality of infrastructure governance and public investment management strongly impacts macroeconomic outcomes – in developing countries with strong governance records, additional public investments tend to have stronger positive impacts on growth, crowd in private investment, and do not lead to rising debt ratios.  Existing assessments suggest that countries’ weaknesses tend to be most pronounced in institutions specific to public investment, rather than public financial management functions that relate not just to infrastructure but a broader set of issues. Strengthening public sector capacities in this area, including project appraisal, selection, implementation and maintenance, is thus a priority.  

Public investment decisions should be guided by a country’s medium-term sustainable development strategies and plans. Public investment priorities should emerge from broader national development priorities – e.g. as an investment strategy that is associated with a medium-term plan, and that identifies priorities based on development objectives and cost estimates. This is likely to enhance policy coherence toward broader objectives such as structural transformation. If linked to a medium-term fiscal and budget framework and debt management strategy, it can reduce volatility of financing for capital expenditure. Stronger medium-term budget practices are associated with higher and less volatile public investment performance.  Integrated national financing frameworks (INFFs) can help countries align their investment strategies and related financing decisions with its overall development plans. 

Any conditionalities associated with resources provided for the achievement of climate or SDG priorities must be anchored in such nationally determined and owned priorities and plans. There is great potential in exploiting shared interest and objectives around climate action and the SDGs to mobilize additional resources for developing countries. To ensure that such resources are indeed used for their intended purposes in an effective manner, they should be tied to nationally owned and developed strategies and plans, based on lessons learned over many years in the development effectiveness agenda. INFFs can guide development partners and other actors in their support.

3.2 Additional international public financing and public development banks

International public finance is an affordable and stable source of long-term finance. It must play a leading role in financing investments in recovery, SDGs, and climate action. It is well placed to fund these investments for two reasons: first, public finance providers should have longer time horizons than private investors, allowing them to ‘engage in market arbitrage’ and fund those long-term productive investments that other eschew. That is to say, with many private actors investing with shorter time horizons, there should be long-term investment opportunities that are under-priced, and that a patient investor could fund profitably, thus ‘arbitraging’ market behaviour. Second, they share SDG and climate priorities, and are seeking sustainable development impact (possibly combined with financial viability) rather than maximization of financial returns. Hence, they are willing to provide concessional financing for investments that would otherwise not be competitive on a risk-return adjusted basis. 

Public development banks can lend long-term, at affordable rates, and countercyclically, dampening financing pressures during crises. Because of public backing, development banks can fund their activities cheaply, and pass this advantage on to their borrowers, through lower interest rates and longer maturities, ranging to 40 years for concessional loans by the MDBs, for example. Often, they combine financial support with technical assistance, and focus on projects and sectors well aligned with climate action and the SDGs. Finally, they are better placed to absorb and manage rollover risks, and have the capacity to act countercyclically. Both the MDBs and national and regional development banks have done so in the current crisis (see Chapter III.C.).  Public development banks already have a large footprint – 527 development banks and development finance institutions have total assets of USD 13 trillion , with a small number of very large banks holding the vast majority of assets. They are estimated to finance around 10 per cent of investment globally.  But they could do more. In light of large unmet public financing needs, their role can be further strengthened, in terms of the scale of their lending, lending terms, and their cooperation as a ‘development bank system’. 

Multilateral development banks can further expand their lending, through capital increases and balance sheet optimization. They have been constrained in their Covid-19 response due to limited financial capacity (see Chapter III.C. of the 2021 FSDR). To further increase their lending capacity, their capital position could be strengthened, and use of their capital optimized. This includes:
• capital increases to non-concessional windows, and early replenishments of concessional lending windows. Such capital increases can be tied to specific SDG or climate priorities, as suggested in the climate-dedicated capital increase by the UN Independent Expert Group on Climate Finance.  
• more effective use of the existing capital base – studies show that MDBs could significantly increase lending without impacting their credit ratings (see Chapter III.C.). The G20 has initiated a review of capital adequacy frameworks of MDBs. 
• rechanneling unused SDRs through MDBs who are already prescribed holders. The nature of SDRs as reserve assets creates some technical challenges in this regard, but there are models to overcome these (for example, eligible MDBs could set up funds based on the PRGT model to address restrictions related to SDRs).  (See Chapters III.C. and F.)

Public development banks can provide lending on terms that support long-term and stable access to finance. Lending on such terms can help to address key risks and uncertainties laid out above, including roll-over and exchange rate risks associated with short-term and foreign currency borrowing, liquidity risks and sudden stops. 
• MDBs in particular provide lending at long maturities (median maturities for MDB loans are 23 years in MICs and 30 years in LDCs, see Chapter III.C.); as noted in last year’s FSDR, lengthening of such maturities to 50 years, at fixed interest rates, could be considered, particularly for financing investments with a positive but very long-term impact on growth including for non-concessional loans, such as health and education. This would need to be accompanied by capital increases to account for the greater need for risk capital. 
• Countercyclicality could be further strengthened. Public development banks, along with bilateral lenders, should consider greater and more systematic use of state-contingent clauses in their own lending, with a view to provide breathing room to countries hit by shocks (akin to automatizing an initiative like the DSSI, in case of a systemic crisis). They have been used at a small scale so far, e.g. through the AFD’s Prêt Très Concesionnel Contracyclique (PTCC), and could complement quick-disbursing and insurance mechanisms to provide fiscal space when it is most needed (see 2021 FSDR); development banks could also help familiarize market participants with such clauses and thus help overcome first-mover problems in their use in commercial borrowing. 
• MDBs should also consider increasing lending in local currency. Providing a greater share of their lending to sovereigns in local currencies would contribute to lowering borrowers’ debt risk profiles, particularly when lending for projects that are unlikely to generate foreign currency earnings. Both the Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank and the New Development Bank have prioritized such lending. MDBs that have geographically diversified portfolios should be in a better position to manage currency risks. The Addis Agenda encouraged further growth in this area, and the use of diversification to manage related risks. 

National and sub-regional development banks should be strengthened. Development banks and development finance institutions play an important role in all regions, and at all levels. In the Latin America and Caribbean region for example, financing for the Covid-19 response from subregional and national development banks significantly exceeded that by the MDBs.  Existing surveys find both that national development banks lend long-term, and that they play a countercyclical role during crises.  However, they tend to play a much smaller role in poorer regions – in least developed and low-income countries, they are smaller in number and smaller in size, even relative to the size of their host economies, suffering from governance challenges, constraints in capacity and capital.  These challenges are linked – their size is constrained by fiscal capacity of the sovereign that backstops its activities; a poorly run institution that runs into solvency challenges in turn could threaten sovereign balance sheets. They could benefit from capacity and financial support from larger and more established development banks, in the context of a strengthened system of development banks. Such support had been provided until the 1970s, when the World Bank Group advised and financed a number of national institutions. With renewed recognition of their role, such relationships could be strengthened, through financial cooperation and technical assistance.  In turn, regional and global institutions can benefit from local knowledge of national institutions. The ‘Finance in Common’ system can play an important role in this regard, as it is supports closer cooperation between public developments banks, through strategic dialogue, joint methodologies and measures and innovative co-financing. 

Other sources of concessional financing should be scaled up. Development banks play a special role because of their ability to lever public contributions in financial markets. But public financing must be scaled up through other channels as well – starting with traditional donors meeting their ODA and climate finance commitments, and channelling unused SDRs to low- and middle-income countries in need; several proposals have been made in this regard (see Chapter III.F). 

3.3 Enhancing stability and reducing uncertainty in markets

Commercial funding is a large source of financing for long-term investment for a growing number of developing countries, but it is not playing the role it should play. Commercial financing can be costly and volatile. Borrowing terms depend on macroeconomic fundamentals and other idiosyncratic factors such as political risks, climate-related risks and disasters, but also on the global financial cycle. To play its role as a source of stable and long-term financing for sustainable development, efforts are needed to (i) reduce (actual and perceived) risks, including those emanating at both national and global levels; (ii) enhance the information ecosystem to enable longer-term and sustainable investments; and (iii) share risks between public and private actors (e.g. through blended finance mechanisms) for investments in shared priorities when appropriate. Relevant policy options are clustered in actions at the national and global levels. 

’Macro-fundamentals’ and other domestic factors

Domestic determinants of borrowing costs include but are not limited to macro-fundamentals, domestic institutions and the enabling environment. Sovereign yields are influenced by a range of national and global factors. They include credit risk related to the fiscal situation, debt stocks, and growth prospects; inflation, monetary policy and other macro-financial variables; foreign exposure, exchange rate volatility and related factors; domestic financial market conditions, including the size of the foreign investor base; perception of political risk and stability; and global liquidity conditions.  Beyond macro-fundamentals and global conditions, studies have also found (lack of) transparency and information to impact risk premia. 

Growth-oriented and resilient macro-fiscal frameworks reduce risk and risk perceptions. Macro-fiscal frameworks anchor fiscal policies and annual budgets in a medium-term policy framework. Their primary objective is to stabilize economic activity and public service delivery in the short run and through business cycles, and to promote economic growth and sustainable development over the longer term, which ultimately also support long-term debt sustainability. With regard to the former, a key challenge is to overcome the ‘procyclicality trap’ of fiscal policy, which has long plagued developing countries,  and which has been the main focus of support in the current crisis. Systematically strengthening these capacities on the expenditure side could include strengthening social protection systems, and protecting or even expanding capital spending in downturns, e.g. through pre-approved public investments that are ‘shovel-ready’. It also includes the ability to save in good times (see also Chapter III.A.). With regard to the ‘structural role’ of fiscal policy, this is about the ability to contribute to sustained growth in incomes and aggregate demand, e.g. by addressing inequalities, supporting technological progress, and structural transformation.  As such, it links macroeconomic, budgetary and debt sustainability objectives to longer-term sustainable development and growth priorities. 

Reducing reliance on foreign currency borrowing can reduce risk premiums. In light of large unmet investment needs, many developing countries rely on foreign savings to finance a sizeable share of their domestic investment. But reliance on foreign savings is risky, as episodes of prolonged current account deficits often end in crisis.  This speaks to the need to attract more non-debt creating sources of external financing, in particular foreign direct investment, to deepen domestic financial markets, and to reduce the reliance on foreign currency debt (see Box ‎II.2 and Chapter III.B).  More immediately, macroprudential measures help dampen both domestic financial cycles and capital inflow volatility.  Capital flow management measures can complement macroprudential policies, particularly in crises situations. ‘Preemptive’ and countercyclical measures aimed at dampening excessive portfolio inflows during boom times lower the risk of sudden stops and risk premia on foreign currency lending during crises.  (see Chapter III.F).

Box ‎II.2
Local Currency Government Bond Market Development

Deep and efficient domestic government debt markets can help strengthen resilience to shocks in times of financial turbulence. Recent financial crises, including the turmoil in financial markets caused by the COVID-19 pandemic, have shown that efficient Local Currency Borrowing Markets (LCBMs) can increase financial resilience by mitigating currency risk, which is often a source of financial distress. In addition, the development of LCBMs is a cornerstone of broader capital market development that helps to price risk appropriately, allows participants in financial markets to better manage their portfolios, and provides a more effective conduit for monetary policy. In turn, these factors help boost a country’s long-term economic growth potential. 

Developing domestic debt markets is a complex process that requires multiple and interdependent policy actions. Though broad guidelines and general principles to develop LCBMs are available, their translation into specific reforms is a daunting task because it requires actions from a broad range of stakeholders, including the debt manager; the central bank; regulators; the providers of trading, payment, clearing, and settlement systems; and other policy makers. As countries tend to be at different levels of development along these various dimensions, further developing their LCBMs requires a country-specific, customized approach.

To anchor this approach, the IMF and the World Bank have developed a guidance note to provide a comprehensive and systematic framework for LCBM development.a Recognizing the obstacles that hamper the implementation of LCBM reforms, it starts from a systematic assessment of the preconditions for success and the stages of market development along the typical six major building blocks of LCBM development: money market, primary market, investor base, secondary market, financial market infrastructure, and the legal and regulatory framework. Applying a series of specific indicators, the guidance note framework allows for (a) the identification of gaps in a country’s LCBM, (b) the assessment of a country’s stage of market development, and (c) the identification of possible peers that may provide replicable lessons.

Source: IMF
a International Monetary Fund, World Bank. 2021. Guidance Note for Developing Local Currency Bond Markets. IMF Analytical Note 2021/001. March.

Global sources of volatility and risk

Steps should be taken to mitigate global ‘push factors’. As global factors have become increasingly important in determining capital flows and their volatility, policy action will also be needed at that level to mitigate those, to reduce developing countries’ vulnerability to sudden stops, and to improve their lending terms. Monetary policies in the center are a key driver of the global financial cycle. Major Central Banks can contribute to dampening that cycle by increasing transparency of their decision making, providing forward guidance to markets, and taking spillover effects of their monetary policy decisions into account. This is increasingly justified even within the terms of their own domestic mandates, as ‘spillbacks’ – the second order impacts of tightening financial conditions through lower growth in developing countries – have increased significantly.  This also calls for greater consideration of their global macroprudential responsibilities in financial sector regulation (see also chapter III.F). 

More global action is needed to prevent and speedily resolve liquidity and solvency crises. Despite its significant extension in the wake of the 2008 global financial crisis, the global financial safety net continues to face resource constraints and gaps in coverage. IMF emergency lending and the SDR allocation were the main instruments accessible for most countries, while regional financing arrangements (RFAs) have not lived up to their potential. Beyond expansion of the financing capacity of the IMF, a strengthening of RFAs should be considered (see Chapter III.F.). When liquidity turn into solvency challenges, defaults on external debt are often protracted, in the absence of a formal debt resolution framework (see Chapter III.E.). Formalizing implementation procedures of the Common Framework, and addressing some of its shortcomings (timeliness, eligibility; provision of standstills for countries approaching the CF; and clarifying private sector participation through comparability of treatment), would be an important step in the right direction. 

Transparency and the information ecosystem

Enhanced debt transparency can reduce uncertainty premia. Challenges remain over the disclosure of the full set of liabilities of countries, which can impact borrowing costs. Transparency remains a challenge particularly for debt incurred beyond central government, such as municipalities and state-owned enterprises, for other types of contingent liabilities, for domestic and non-tradeable external debt, and for resource-backed loans. A more complex debt landscape increases reporting burdens on debt management offices with limited capacities; some creditors also insist on confidentiality clauses that tie debtors’ hands. The lack of transparency comes at a concrete fiscal cost however, in addition to undermining accountability to citizens – while hiding the true extent of debt may lower cost in the short run or help circumvent fiscal rules, in the long term more transparent debt management results in higher credit ratings and ultimately reduces risk premia.   Increased transparency across countries can, over time, reduce uncertainty, risk perception and borrowing costs of the entire asset class. This will require investments in public debt management legal, institutional and operational frameworks, and related international support; it will require creditors refraining from confidentiality clauses and disclosing relevant information, and it will require the international community to streamline and consolidate debt reporting requirements and databases to lower reporting burdens and enhance transparency (see Chapter III.E.). 

Further extending the horizon of credit ratings and debt sustainability assessments would complement the existing information ecosystem and could provide important insights for long-term oriented actors. Credit rating agencies provide information to investors and to financial markets to help them price risk. Ratings thus affect volume, cost, and stability of access to market financing. The IMF and World Bank’s debt sustainability assessments (DSAs) also monitor relevant country risks and provide early warning for debt distress. For low-income countries in particular, DSA assessments determine countries’ eligibility for and terms of concessional financing (see chapter III.E). Existing assessments adopt a short- to medium-term time horizon – assessing capacity to service debt is typically 3 years for credit ratings in practice, and somewhat longer (5-10 years) for the DSAs. Because (perceived and actual) solvency risks can affect (terms of) market access, and liquidity crises can turn into solvency crises, short time focused ratings do serve a purpose in helping creditors evaluate near term risks. But they risk enhancing procyclicality in markets, rather than dampening it; and would not capture long-term risks such as climate risks. They do not therefore fully incorporate many issues that are of critical importance to actors with longer time horizons – public borrowers, a growing number of investors, and the international community at large. Several steps are already being taken -- and additional steps could be taken -- to address these concerns:
• Debt sustainability assessments by the International Financial Institutions increasingly incorporate long-term considerations, despite the challenges noted above – including climate and disaster risks for relevant countries, as well as growth impacts of public investments (see Chapter III.E., and previous editions of the FSDR)
• Few governments systematically value their public commercial assets, which can create a bias against capital spending. More active management of these public assets, e.g. in dedicated public wealth funds or on the balance sheets of national development banks, could lead to more effective use, generate additional income, and complement debt sustainability assessments with a better understanding of government net worth.  There is evidence that bond markets do take the composition of fiscal policy into account when they have information on it, with deficit increases driven by increases in public investment lowering sovereign spreads. 
• Related discussions are ongoing in regard to fiscal rules, e.g. in the context of the European Union’s fiscal framework. A proposed ‘green golden rule’ would exclude public investments in climate action from consideration in existing deficit and debt limits. This would incentive capital spending on climate priorities; in countries that face debt sustainability concerns, it would make the tension between shared political commitment to climate action and budget constraints explicit and facilitate a political solution. 
•  Long-term credit ratings could be an important complement to existing ratings and assessments. They would be particularly valuable for investors with long-term liabilities, for example pension funds, but would help all creditors better understand the fundamentals of the countries in which they’re investing. (see Box ‎II.3 on Credit Rating Agencies). 

Box ‎II.3
Credit Rating Agencies and sovereign financing

Credit ratings play an important role in international capital markets as they provide creditors with assessments of a debtor’s relative risk of default. Inaccurate ratings can impact the cost of borrowing and the stability of the international financial system, as demonstrated during the 2008 global financial crisis. That crisis resulted in regulatory reforms to reduce the mechanistic reliance of financial regulation on ratings and address conflicts of interest, particularly in relation to ratings of corporates and structured finance. 

Sovereign ratings are structurally different from corporate ratings in that analyst judgements about political risks and “willingness to pay” play a much greater role. Since sovereign ratings often act as a country-level ceiling for corporate ratings, they affect both public and corporate borrowing, and thus overall investment in the SDGs. 

A detailed analysis finds that 61 out of 154 rated sovereigns were downgraded by at least one of the big three credit rating agencies (CRAs) during the COVID-19 pandemic. Developing countries accounted for nearly all the sovereign downgrades, negative outlooks, and reviews for downgrades, with middle-income countries representing 60 per cent of the downgrades (see Figure ‎II.2). Developed countries, which saw much larger debt increases and economic slowdowns, largely escaped downgrades – reinforcing their access to ample, cheap market financing. This discrepancy, which could be due to a host of reasons, underlines the importance of transparent methodologies, so as not to undermine confidence in ratings.

In addition to ratings’ impact on the cost of borrowing, three additional questions related to developing country sovereign credit ratings stand out: (i) the term of assessments and integration of climate change and other non-economic factors; (ii) incorporation of public sector actions, including official debt restructurings, such as DSSI, into ratings analysis; and (iii) potential sell-offs from “cliff-effects” and financial market instability. 

CRAs are already integrating climate risk into their ratings. Conversely, a country’s efforts to invest in the SDGs, including in resilience and climate adaptation, should be viewed favourably in ratings that take a sufficiently long-term perspective – analogous to markets ‘rewarding’ capital spending. The current CRA “long-term” rating is meant to cover three to five years for non-investment-grade issuers and up to ten years for investment-grade issuers. In practice, sovereign ratings use financial and economic forecasts up to three years, which may over-emphasize near-term economic business cycle expectations and exacerbate volatility. Ideally, rating methodologies could incorporate more long-term factors, such as environmental and social risks and improvements, which could be published in new long-term assessments that complement existing assessments. The use of scenarios for both economic and non-economic risks could make long-term assessments more manageable to produce. Such scenarios can be derived from stress tests for various adverse shocks and their impacts on debt dynamics, or through probabilistic approaches that develop many scenarios and allow to assign likelihoods to different debt paths, including adverse scenarios. Long-term ratings could help reduce procyclicality and, if well implemented, capture the positive effects of investments in climate and environmental resilience. 

Official sector debt relief can help strengthen countries’ balance sheets and ability to repay all debt in the medium term. Despite no countries ultimately being downgraded for participation in the DSSI, some developing countries, including those with elevated debt distress risks, were deterred from joining the programme due to the fear that participation would trigger rating downgrades. Greater dialogue could have helped avert such misunderstandings, on the part of both countries and CRAs. A standing, formal structure or framework to facilitate continued dialogue could be considered. 

Ratings may also be linked to price volatility beyond what would be warranted by fundamental factors, including due to so-called “cliff effects”. “Fallen angels” are issuers that have been downgraded from an “investment grade” rating to a sub-investment-grade rating. These issuers may face a sell-off of their debt from investors that are precluded from holding speculative grade debt, due to either unreformed regulatory rules or rigid mandates of private sector investment funds, especially passive funds. Fund managers do seem to have some discretion about the timing of portfolio rebalancing in periods of extreme market stress, however increased monitoring of this risk could be helpful. Investment managers could more explicitly adopt a portfolio approach to ratings levels in their mandates, while regulators can work to eliminate the few remaining pockets of mechanistic reliance on ratings.

Several structural factors related to CRAs and their role in the wider capital market ecosystem remain. Efforts to reduce market concentration, with just three CRAs holding over 90 per cent of the market share, have not been effective as of yet. This is in part due to enormous barriers to entry for new firms as the nature of the business is built on reputation and trust. Limited market pressures may reduce incentives to update methodologies and take advantage of new technologies in credit assessments. Structural challenges also have ongoing implications beyond sovereign ratings. Progress on these issues remains limited, as adopting effective reforms remains difficult both technically and politically. Voluntary actions by CRAs, for example transparently separating quantitative models from value-added judgement, could increase trust and help investors better assess the quality and objectivity of ratings; such more transparent analysis could complement existing projections and sustainability assessments by the public sector. 

Figure ‎II.2
Sovereign ratings movement over time, by country grouping, 2019-2021
(index)

Source: DESA calculations, based on Moody’s Analytics
Note: This figure shows an index of rating actions by Moody’s analytics, with 0 on 11 March 2020, the date of declaration of the global pandemic by WHO. All sovereigns are weighted equally, each positive (negative) outlook is +1 (-1); a review for upgrade (downgrade) is +2 (-2); and a positive (negative) rating change is +3 (-3).

Translating shared priorities into lower borrowing costs

Investors concerned about climate and SDG impacts may be willing to pay a premium for debt instruments that tie the use of proceeds to such priorities. Sovereigns have aimed to exploit this interest in debt issuances and in restructurings (see below). A growing number of countries (over 20 at this point) have issued green, social and sustainability bonds. Such bonds have been a fast growing segment of the broader green bond market, but remain a small part of the overall and vast sovereign bond market. Such issuances can help raise resources for key public policy priorities; sovereigns can also catalyze the broader green finance market by providing benchmark pricing and demonstration effects. Tying the use of proceeds to climate action or the SDGs may help reduce borrowing costs - taking advantage of investors’ growing interest in sustainability issues, some studies have found that such bonds can be issued at a slightly reduced cost (‘greenium’).  (See also Chapter III.B)  

The international community can also provide targeted subsidies to bring down borrowing costs in markets for investments in shared priorities. (See also Chapter III.C. for the use of guarantees in blended finance.) Partial guarantees and credit enhancements are most commonly used in sovereign debt restructurings – with a view to entice private creditor participation and acceptance of thus-enhanced newly issued bonds. Policy-based guarantees have been used on a small scale, e.g. by the World Bank (but also by some bilateral providers), to improve borrowing terms in markets. They have helped countries diversify their creditor base, securing longer maturities and lower interest rates, in return for commitments to reforms consistent with the World Bank’s broader country partnership strategies.  Such partial guarantees, while not appropriate for countries at high risk of debt distress, could help mobilize financing at more attractive terms for countries with low or moderate levels of debt; development finance institutions can achieve high leverage for investments in key shared priorities. Recent research suggests that hypothetical ‘green sovereign bond guarantees’ for climate mitigation investments in select developing countries could produce savings for borrowing countries of up to 23 per cent of the principal amount of guaranteed bonds, significantly exceeding the cost of subsidy for the provider.   

3.4 Addressing the debt overhang

High levels of debt mean that additional financing alone will not suffice for many countries, and that measures to address the debt overhang must be part of global efforts. With debt levels spiking across the board since the onset of the pandemic, the related costs –debt servicing, indirect costs from required policy adjustments, and default risk – have increased as well, and reached levels that endanger SDG prospects in many countries. With the Debt Service Suspension Initiative (DSSI) for least developed and low-income countries expired, no comparable relief on offer for middle-income countries, uncertain growth prospects and rising climate risks, tightening global liquidity conditions and a creditor-friendly international financial architecture, there is a high risk of countries entering protracted debt crises, and a need for debt relief for affected countries.  Without such relief, the SDGs will be out of reach (see 2021 FSDR). Ongoing initiatives such as the Common Framework play an important role in this regard, but existing implementation challenges must be addressed; in case of a systemic crisis, statutory instruments may be needed (see Chapter III.E).  


2023 FSDR - Chapter 2

II. What will it take? Financing sustainable industrial transformation1

1 Introduction and Key Messages 

Scaling up investment in sustainable industrial transformation can be the key to rescuing the SDGs. Industrialization and structural transformation have been historic engines of economic and productivity growth, job creation and technological advancement ñ and have laid the foundation for poverty reduction and a sustained mobilization of domestic resources. A vibrant domestic private sector engaged in dynamic activities has been at the heart of sustained progress and development in most countries. At the same time, countriesí efforts to spur industrial transformations have a mixed record, not least in their impacts on equity, the environment, and sustainable development more broadly; many lessons can be learned from both failures and successes. 

In response to a series of major shocks and crises, the state of domestic productive capacities has become a central concern of policy makers around the world again. The 2007/8 Great Recession, the ongoing climate crisis, the pandemic, and most recently, the fallout from the war in Ukraine have all contributed to a revival of industrial policies. Countries have taken steps to support low-carbon transitions, create decent jobs, promote digitalization and enhance resilience of their economies to economic and non-economic shocks. Industrial policy measures more than doubled between 2009 and 2019, with much of the growth in developed countries.

The revival of industrial policies provides an opportunity to achieve sustainable industrial transformations. The SDGs give todayís efforts at industrial transformation a desired direction: it has to be underpinned not only by economic growth, but by growth that can be sustained over time, is inclusive and creates decent jobs, and is environmentally sustainable and supports rapid decarbonization.  

Sustainable industrial transformations require scaled up, coordinated and ëtargetedí public and private investments. Sustainable transformations require investments by the private sector in innovation, energy transition and other areas, and affordable access to finance to fund these investments. Sustainable transformations also require public investments in sustainable infrastructure and other public goods to overcome supply side bottlenecks and crowd in private investment, and the fiscal space to maintain such investments. Because sustainable industrial transformations are ëdirectionalí, they also require a more expansive toolkit to create and align incentives for sustainable investment: public leadership and coordination to create investment opportunities, e.g. in activities critical to the low-carbon transition, demand-side or regulatory measures to support development and adoption of desirable technologies, and the alignment of tax and fiscal systems and all other relevant policy frameworks with the SDGs. 

Sustainable industrial and financing policies, both national actions and international support, are key to facilitate such transformations. This chapter discusses relevant policy options, with a particular focus on financing policies that are pertinent to the action areas of the Addis Ababa Action Agenda. Several key messages emerge: 

> Countries should have strong ownership over the industrial policy formulation process, and relevant stakeholders ñ private business, labour, civil society and others ñ should be involved in inclusive consultation and decision-making processes. Sustainable industrial transformations depend on buy-in and coordinated actions of many stakeholders.

> Policymakers need to develop a coherent sustainable industrial policy strategy, aligned with a countryís overall vision. Sustainable industrial policies should be closely linked to national sustainable development strategies and plans, which can be supported by integrated national financing frameworks. They need to be context-specific, responding to a countryís binding constraints and institutional frameworks. 

> Countries must provide support to vulnerable groups that may lose economic opportunities in transitions. This underscores the importance of universal social protection systems. 

> To reduce the cost of capital for firms, countries should continue to improve domestic enabling environments (thus reducing investment risks) and financial sectors (to lower the cost of capital domestically), along with adopting supportive macroeconomic policies. 

> Public development banks are a major source of long-term financing, and can help address financing gaps for sustainable transformation. They can provide funding for new, smaller, or innovative firms, or for priority sectors. Public development banks also develop specific expertise and market intelligence - they can fill both knowledge and resource gaps.

> Investment incentives remain the most prevalent sustainable industrial policy instruments, and can be complemented by demand-side measures and appropriate technology standards to spur development and adoption of sustainable production processes. They also need careful policy design to manage fiscal impacts and avoid capture, e.g. by linking support to success criteria.

> Many developing countries will need capacity and financial support. The international community can support countriesí efforts through systemic reforms in the international financial architecture, as well as project-specific support, e.g. through blended finance instruments well aligned with national priorities.

> Developing countries also need to preserve existing and, in some areas, regain lost policy space to pursue sustainable industrial policies. There are risks of rising fragmentation in the global economy. Efforts to tackle climate change and the SDGs, and recent industrial policy announcements in some major economies have led to calls to increase multilateral dialogue and potentially adapt current multilateral rules. An unlevel playing field and the ëfinance divideí must not undermine developing countriesí ability to achieve sustainable industrial transformations.

2 
Why now? Sustainable industrial transformation and the SDGs

2.1 Industrialization and structural transformation as a historic engine of development 

Historically, most countries that achieved sustained economic development and improvements in living standards have done so through structural transformation. Structural transformation involves the reallocation of capital and human resources from low to high-productivity activities and sectors through economic diversification and strengthening productive linkages in the economy.28 A more diversified economy enables higher per capita incomes,29 lower volatility, poverty reduction and better long-term growth prospects.30 Impacts of structural transformation also range beyond economic growth. They often include increased migration from rural areas to urban centers, usually combined with a reduction in birth rates, greater participation of women in the workforce, and deep political and sociocultural changes.

Manufacturing sector growth and industrialization have historically been central to structural transformation. Because of several unique properties, manufacturing activities were often at heart of sustained growth episodes, with structural transformation typically involving a rapid increase in the share of industry and a corresponding decline in agriculture in economic activity.31 First, technological advances often originated in the manufacturing sector, and diffused from there to other sectors. Manufacturing firms in developing countries were often able to import and adapt these technologies and achieve rapid productivity growth even when broader institutional capabilities and skills were still comparatively scarce in their host economies.32 Technological and organizational learning in these firms triggered significant economic and knowledge spillovers to the rest of the economy. Second, many low-skilled workers found employment in manufacturing, at least until recently. In that, manufacturing differs greatly from other high productivity sectors such as finance; it allowed developing countries to attract investment, import technology and capital goods, and combine it with low-skilled labour. And third, manufacturing products are tradeable, and hence growth is not limited by the small size of domestic markets in many developing countries.33  

Improvements in agricultural productivity were usually a pre-condition for industrialization. Improvements in agricultural productivity allowed agriculture to produce food needed to feed urban industrial workers, release labour for employment, supply raw materials to support the industrial sector, including agro-industries, increase exports to pay for industrial investments, and enhance the domestic market for industrial products.34 Today, some agro-industries and knowledge-intensive services have proven to be technologically dynamic, with high potential for productivity growth (see also Boxes II.1 and II.2),35  while some manufacturing activities have become ëcommodifiedí, limiting their potential to support upgrading and learning. 

Throughout history, countries provided targeted support to domestic firms to enter dynamic sectors, with policies evolving over time in response to changes in the global economy. Structural transformation is underpinned by the expansion of productive, technological and organizational capabilities at the firm and industry level. Firms generally acquire these capabilities in the process of production (ëlearning by doingí), but this learning process is fraught with uncertainty (see Box II.6 below). Countries have long provided support for domestic firms, often in specific industries with a view to shape comparative advantages.36 The interpretation and debates around industrial policies have emphasized different aspects at different times: the protection of infant industries in the 19th Century; structural change and the role of a dynamic manufacturing sector after World War Two; and market failures, technological and organizational learning and the industrial policy design to address governance challenges at the end of the 20th and beginning of the 21st centuries. 37 The industrial policy toolbox changed accordingly: while protectionist trade policies and tariffs were the most common tool in earlier phases, low interest loans, financial grants (e.g. R&D subsidies or investment grants), and trade financing are now more prevalent.38
While the industrial policy record is mixed, there are lessons that can be learned from both successes and failures. The contributions of industrial policies have often been contested. This is in part because such policies are difficult to assess due to static costs but dynamic benefits, and also because such policies can be open to corruption and state capture. Recent research, taking advantage of ënatural experimentsí, has however confirmed positive and long-lasting impacts of historical industrial policies.39 At the same time, there is no shortage of failed interventions, with a mixed policy record overall, and significant variations in their impact on sustainability and equity across countries. From these experiences, key policy lessons emerge on both policy design and state-business relations, including the need for:

* A clear vision with specific objectives and political accountability: a clear vision must be translated into specific near and medium-term objectives that tackle clearly defined challenges, and against which policies can be assessed and revised if needed; political accountability against such targets has also been important; 
* Context specific strategies: industrial transformation is typically a gradual process, and leapfrogging rare. Strategies must identify current and dynamic comparative advantages, and take into account firmsí existing capabilities and their potential to learn and acquire additional ones, to avoid policy failures;40    
* Policy coherence: many industrial policy strategies become undone because macroeconomic, financing, trade or other policies were not aligned with its objectives; often this is a symptom of the industrial policy strategy not being consistent with the broader national vision and/or not fully backed by the countryís leadership, which may have competing or conflicting interests41. If relevant stakeholders do not participate in the policy formulation process, implementation and impact are often limited;
* Addressing political economy and governance challenges head on: policymakers need a good understanding of private sector challenges, and hence a close relationship with the business sector; but this relationship also heightens risks of policy or regulatory capture, with temporary subsidies turning into permanent support for underperforming or uncompetitive firms.42 In some cases, structural transformation policies were discredited and abandoned for decades as a result of misuse of public funds. Policies need to be designed to mitigate against risks of capture. 
* Managing sustainable development impacts:  to ensure that industrial transformations are inclusive and sustainable, proactive policies are needed to support (and compensate) those at risk of being left behind, and to ensure environmental sustainability.

Box II. 1
Rural economies and the potential of agroindustry

In the absence of inclusive rural transformation in many LDCs, low-productivity agriculture continues to dominate rural economic activity and rural poverty remains high. When increasing urbanization is not supported by growth in manufacturing, people leaving agriculture are moving mostly into the informal service sector, which is also characterized by low productivity. 

Successful structural transformations in such cases rely on a strengthening ruralñurban linkages, better connecting agriculture to urban manufacturing and service sectors. Agro-industries could play a productive role, and could provide a viable path for sustainable industrial transformation in ëlate transformingí countries. In sub-Saharan Africa for example, agro-industries account for a significantly higher share of total manufacturing employment than in other regions. Agro-industries and services along the agri-food value chain have the potential to absorb labour that leaves primary agriculture. As such activities are geographically spread and dominated by SMEs, they also create employment opportunities in small and medium size cities and towns, preventing migration to megacities. They could also provide the springboard for other forms of manufacturing and services through technology spillovers, improved management skills and capital accumulation. 
For this potential to materialize, the industry needs to overcome bottlenecks for financing and expansion ñ including the fact that many firms in the sector are small, family based, scattered and lacking economies of scale.  

Source: FAO

Box II. 2
'Connected servicesí and their contribution to industrial transformation	

International supply chains rely on four services sectors ñ financial services, information and communication technologies, transport and logistics, and business and professional services ñ for their functioning. Together with digital technologies, these services connect businesses within their supply chains. 

These service sectors have also become major sources of employment creation, exports, foreign direct investment (FDI), and innovation. Through linkages to other sectors, their presence also enhances competitiveness of firms in other sectors. For example, in regions with high-quality connected services, 44 per cent of all companies export, compared with 19 per cent of firms where such services are weaker. Seizing their full potential depends on reforming trade, investment and competition policies, combined with training to upgrade worker and firm competencies and technology adoption. 

Source: ITC43

2.2 The role of industrialization and structural transformation in the sustainable development agenda

Structural transformations and industrial policies have to be sustainable and inclusive. Achieving the SDGs requires rapid transformations of production processes. As countries seek to decarbonize the economy, create decent jobs, and address deep-rooted inequalities emanating from the productive sphere, policymakers are again looking to industrial policies to tackle these challenges.44 The SDGs are giving structural transformation a desired direction: it has to be underpinned not only by economic growth that can be sustained over time by building the required technological and other capabilities, but that is also inclusive and creates decent jobs, and that is environmentally sustainable and supports rapid decarbonization.45 

Sustainable and inclusive industrialization is a core element of the Addis Ababa Action Agenda and the 2030 Agenda. The importance of industrial development is recognized in the Addis Agenda, where countries commit to ìinvest in promoting inclusive and sustainable industrial development to effectively address major challenges such as growth and jobs, resources and energy efficiency, pollution and climate change, knowledge-sharing, innovation and social inclusion.î46 The 2030 Agenda ìreintroduced the notion of development as a process of change in the productive structure of an economyî, which had been a less prominent aspect of the Millennium Development Goals.47 In SDG 9, countries commit to ìbuild resilient infrastructure, promote inclusive and sustainable industrialization and foster innovation.î At the current pace of progress, the world will not achieve SDG9, with significant challenges for developing economies (see Box II.3).



Box II. 3
Progress in SDG 9

The world is lagging behind in achieving industry-related SDG 9 targets. While there is tangible progress in some countries, particularly developed countries, there are stark regional- and country-level differences. Several large middle-income countries have achieved substantial progress, while LDCs in Africa record a clear regression (Figure II.1). Key data gaps also remain. 

Figure II. 1
Progress on the achievement of SDG 9 industry-related targets

Source: UNIDO elaboration.
Note: The scores in the Figure are based on the index proposed by Kyn?lov· et. al (2020)48 and refers to the SDG 9 targets 9.2.1a, 9.2.1b, 9.2.2, 9.4.1 and 9.b.1.

The pandemic and uneven recovery had a strong negative impact on SDG 9 achievement. Recovery from the COVID-19 pandemic was incomplete and unequal, including in manufacturing employment. While firms and households in high-income countries benefited from substantial policy support, manufacturing in LDCs stagnated due to limited support measures, coupled with a subdued and volatile global demand and tighter domestic conditions (see 2022 Financing for Sustainable Development Report). While manufacturing output in most country groups had returned to pre-pandemic levels by the end of 2021, this was not the case for LDCs and other low-income economies (Figure II.2). SDG 9 targets, such as 9.2 (industry share in output and employment)2 are in jeopardy particularly for African LDCs (Figure II.3), which have mostly stagnated over the last 20 years. 
Figure II. 2
Year-on-year growth rates of manufacturing output by country group
(Index Q4 2019 = 100)

Source: UNIDO49

Figure II. 3
Prospects of LDCs achieving SDG target 9.2 by 2030
(Per cent and constant 2015 United States dollars)

Source: UNIDO50

Industrialization and structural transformation must be managed to contribute to progress across the SDGs and ensure that progress is inclusive and sustainable. Industrialization impacts economic growth as well as socioeconomic and environmental objectives (see Figure II.4). The specific links between structural transformation and other SDGs have played out differently in different historic and country contexts. They are contingent on policy choices, hence the critical importance of pursuing sustainable and inclusive industrial policies (see Box II.4 for some examples of interlinkages). 



Figure II. 4
Contribution of sustainable industrialization to the SDGs

Source: UNIDO51

Box II. 4
Sustainable industrialization and the SDGs ñ some examples

SDG 1 ñ poverty eradication, and SDG 10, reducing inequality: Greater (formal) employment opportunities and higher wages paid in manufacturing jobs can support the eradication of poverty, help build a middle class, and reduce inequalities. At the same time, the interactions between structural transformation and inequality are complex - Kuznetsí famous proposition was that the move of labour from agriculture to industry would initially increase inequality, only for it to fall over time (the Kuznets curve). Empirically, country experiences have been heterogeneous, with some countries managing benign transitions that combine structural transformation with stable or falling inequality, and others struggling with challenging trade-offs.52 This suggests a strong role for policy to shape transformation pathways. 

SDG 1 ñ poverty eradication, and SDG 10, reducing inequality: Greater (formal) employment opportunities and higher wages paid in manufacturing jobs can support the eradication of poverty, help build a middle class, and reduce inequalities. At the same time, the interactions between structural transformation and inequality are complex - Kuznetsí famous proposition was that the move of labour from agriculture to industry would initially increase inequality, only for it to fall over time (the Kuznets curve). Empirically, country experiences have been heterogeneous, with some countries managing benign transitions that combine structural transformation with stable or falling inequality, and others struggling with challenging trade-offs.53 This suggests a strong role for policy to shape transformation pathways. 

SDG 2: ending hunger: Strengthening ruralñurban linkages, which connect agriculture and the food system to the manufacturing and service sectors, supports further increases in agricultural productivity that of rural activities, facilitates the generation of and marketable surpluses, the diversification of production patterns and livelihoods, and better access to public services and infrastructure in rural areas.54 In countries that substantially reduced rural poverty, inclusive rural transformations additionally created income-generating opportunities in the rural non-farm sector, e.g. in rural services and small scale manufacturing. Agro-industries and agro-processing, which create jobs in rural areas, are a promising source of employment, but require public efforts to address working conditions and lack of social protection in small-scale informal firms.55
SDGs 12, 13, 14 and 15 ñ impacts on the environment: Industrial development can be both the source of and contribute to resolving environmental challenges. Historically, industrialization has been a main contributor to global greenhouse gas emissions and other environmental damages, even as emission intensity typically decreases as countries industrialize. Appropriate policy and regulatory frameworks are needed to mitigate and reduce environmental impacts of manufacturing industries, e.g. to ensure efficient use of resources and responsible management of waste and pollutants (SDG 12), and to support the transition towards more environmentally sustainable production models and decarbonization in manufacturing.  At the same time, manufacturing plays a key role in innovation and efficient production of environmental products, such as wind turbines, solar panels, insulation materials for buildings and electric cars.

SDG 5 ñ gender equality: Structural transformation and industrialization have interacted with gender equality in complex ways. For example, it was often the lower wages of female works that enabled labour-intensive export-led industrialization strategies, and women have often been excluded from ëgood jobsí as economies and sectors upgrade.56 These inequalities persist: Women represent less than 40 per cent of employment in manufacturing; within manufacturing, they are overrepresented in sectors with lower profit margins, low technology intensity and low wages, such as the food, garment, textile and leather sectors.57 The majority of new jobs generated in the transition to low carbon and circular economies will also be created in sectors that are currently male-dominated. Hence, for women to equally benefit from the transition to green economies and industries, specific measures to reduce gender inequalities are needed; in turn greater gender equality can support structural transformations through both positive impacts on aggregate demand and supply-side impacts on the labour force.58 

2.3 Sustainable development and the industrial policy revival  

In recent years, industrialization has reemerged as a key priority for policymakers. An analysis of national policies recorded in the Global Trade Alert initiative has found that industrial policy measures have more than doubled in the period of 2009 to 2019, and that by 2019, nearly half of all policies recorded in the database can be classified as industrial policies, up from only 20 per cent in 2009.  There are several reasons behind this surge:

* Industrial policies have been resurgent since the 2007/8 Great Recession, in response to an increase in inequality and the decline of decent jobs tied to the decline in manufacturing sectors in some countries. One prominent example are policies targeting productive development and job creation in underperforming regions (place-based policies). The localized effects of green transitions have also increased interest in regional and local development policies. 
* To accelerate the development and deployment of low-carbon technologies and the energy transition, many countries have also adopted ëgreen industrial policiesí. Such policies are extremely common in both developed and developing countries - almost 170 countries have targets for the deployment of renewable energies, and around 100 countries use tax incentives, public investment, and/or tendering procedures to achieve these targets.59  Many countries go further and use green industrial policies to support domestic production through various forms of incentives, with a view to create additional local economy benefits such as job creation and domestic innovation. 
* With recent inflation driven in part by supply-side shocks such as the disruption of global supply chains and labour shortages (see Chapter I), there has also been a recognition that industrial policies can play a positive role in addressing macroeconomic challenges. 
* The Covid-19 pandemic revealed vulnerabilities in medical supply chains. Countries with domestic manufacturing capabilities proved more resilient, thanks to the ability to produce essential goods critical to the pandemic response domestically.60 This has rekindled debates around reshoring. Vulnerabilities in food supply chains, particularly food processing and distribution, contributed to rising food prices, particularly in urban centers. 
* Rising geopolitical tensions are providing an additional geostrategic impetus to ëavoiding external dependenciesí, particularly in sectors that are deemed strategically important, such as semiconductors, other high-tech sectors, or energy.61 This has also raised concerns over fragmentation and the risk of technological decoupling, and potential impacts on economic efficiency, innovation, and beyond.  

What all these efforts have in common is a focus on building domestic productive capacities to respond to economic, social, environmental and national security concerns, and a willingness to expand the economic policy toolkit to support such structural change. 62 

While both developed and developing countries have been using industrial policies, their use is  far more prevalent in developed countries. Four out the five countries with largest number of industrial policies are developed countries.63 For example, the European Unionís Green New Deal prominently includes an industrial strategy to support digital and green transitions of European industry. Climate, health, resilience, and national security considerations have led to an industrial policy revival in the United States, with the CHIPS and Science Act allocating over $ 50 billion to support domestic manufacturing capacity in semiconductors, and the Inflation Reduction Act committing around $ 370 billion to supporting investment into clean energy and climate mitigation. It includes tax incentives for clean electricity and energy investments, with extra credits for use of domestically manufactured components; for clean vehicles made in North America; and for domestic clean energy manufacturing of solar panels, turbines, or batteries. 

2.4 A changing and challenging global environment 

The new generation of industrial policies has to respond to a changing and challenging global environment. The rise of global value chains, rapid technological change and digitalization, the impacts of financial globalization, and changes to global rules have made industrial transformation more challenging in recent decades. This has coincided with the geographic concentration of manufacturing activities in a few large countries, and so-called ëpremature deindustrializationí in many developing countries. 

* Manufacturing has been less effective as a ëdevelopment escalatorí. As economies grow and per capita income rises, the share of labour employed in manufacturing tends to first rise, and then fall. Since the 1980s, this turning point has arrived at ever lower levels of per capita income.64 With workers moving from agriculture to services such as trade and hospitality, rather than manufacturing or modern services, productivity growth has become limited, with working conditions characterized by widespread informality.65 

* The rise in global value chains has opened opportunities for firms in developing countries to participate in global production networks, but has also made it more challenging to upgrade to higher value-added activities and build productive linkages to domestic firms. Since the 1950s, large firms have taken advantage of lower costs in other geographies through cross-border supply chains. The intensity increased markedly in the 1990s, when lead firms increasingly organized production in global value chains (GVCs). Their impact on developing countriesí industrialization prospects has been ambiguous: GVCs have enabled countries to attract investment based on their labour cost advantages, and have opened opportunities for firms even in the absence of locally available inputs or other complementary factors. GVCs also enable learning and transfer of tacit knowledge through the interactions between lead firms and suppliers.66 However, GVCs also limit opportunities for ëupgradingí, i.e. entering higher value-adding activities within a value chain, with lead firms retaining the most profitable tasks.67 

* Technological changes and digitalization have ëraised the barí for developing countries and may limit employment creation opportunities. Advances in ICT were a precondition for rapid globalization in the 20th century. Today, the emergence and diffusion of advanced digital production (ADP) technologies is creating new opportunities for developing countries, e.g. in the export of services; but it is also threatening to undermine traditional development pathways. First, production of new technologies is still very much concentrated in a few leading economies (see chapter III.G.)68 Second, automation enabled by digital technologies has undermined job creation in some industries: as more tasks become automated, labour accounts for a smaller share of production costs. Third, advanced production technologies also raise the bar for competitiveness: demands on the quality of infrastructure, logistics and connectivity, as well as educational and skills requirements, will rise, making it more difficult for countries without appropriate infrastructure or capacities to compete.69  

* Financial liberalization and globalization has had the unintended effect of limiting access to credit for some firms. The policy mix of successful ëlate industrializersí typically included ëinterventionistí financing policies: channeling resources to selected firms through the publicly controlled banking system, combined with ëfinancial repressioní, which kept interest rates kept low to support high investment rates; regulations on external financing and capital flows; and competitive exchange rates.70 The current context is very different, with financial markets more liberalized, financial flows intermediated more commonly by markets, and a smaller role of state and development banks. While the growth of financial inclusion has brought financial services to a much greater proportion of the population, bank lending, especially to MSMEs, is still hindered by limited information that banks have on borrowers and other impediments (see Chapter III.B).  Financial globalization has also put developing countries in a very different macroeconomic as more larger corporations, such as commodity exporters, are able to borrow on markets, including in dollars or euros ñ sometimes creating currency mis-matches and making them vulnerable to global financial cycles.71 In addition, in more financialized economies, financing for real economic activities is sometimes at the expense of high yielding and highly leveraged financial investments.

* Changes in global rules have limited policy space of developing countries. Global rules related to financing, trade, investment and technology aim to strike a balance between providing countries with sufficient policy space to address societal concerns, and avoiding negative spill-overs of such policies on other countries. Since the mid-1990s, global, regional and bilateral trade and investment rules have limited (though usually not entirely ruled out) the use of several commonly used industrial policy tools, including tariffs, quantitative restrictions on imports and exports, subsidies, performance or domestic content requirements (see chapter III.D).72

3 What will it take? Industrial and financing policies for sustainable industrial transformation

Sustainable industrial transformation requires scaled up, coordinated, and ëtargetedí public and private investments. Sustainable transformations require large-scale public investments in sustainable infrastructure and other public goods, and the fiscal space to maintain such investment. They require significant investments by the private sector in innovation, energy transition, and other areas, and access to finance at the right terms for firms to fund these investments. Public actions are needed to enable and incentivize private investments fully aligned with economic, social and environmental objectives.  Both public and private actors need to build up relevant capabilities, and they need to step up their cooperation.

Sustainable industrial and financing policies, both national actions and international support, are therefore key to facilitate such transformations. The sustainable industrial policy toolbox is large, as it can be defined to include any policies directed at changing the structure of the domestic economy, in support of strategic goals such as climate action and the SDGs. The remainder of the chapter will discuss how national policies and international actions can facilitate sustainable industrial transformation, with a particular focus on financing policies and actions covered in the Addis Agenda.

3.1  The role and purpose of sustainable industrial policies 

Sustainable industrial policies aim to provide targeted support to firms (e.g. for learning) in priority sectors and create an enabling environment, while ensuring that social and environmental goals are supported and concerns are fully taken into account. As discussed in section 2 above, the objective of this new generation of industrial policies is not only to spur sustained economic growth and build the necessary capabilities in the domestic private sector to innovate and enhance productivity, but also to ëshapeí growth, ensuring that it creates decent jobs and provides opportunities for all, and is environmentally sustainable. Such transformations are unlikely to unfold, and firms are unlikely to invest sufficiently in desired activities (such as innovation or green technologies), without public policy and action. 

Sustainable industrial policies aim to overcome several distinct but related challenges that stand in the way of sustainable structural transformation. For individual firms, whether or not to make an investment that has public policy benefits is a business decision ñ the risks that inevitably come with a new venture may be too high compared to the expected returns, and returns may not be competitive with alternative investments opportunities. But the decision to forego the investment may be due to a number of underlying reasons, including high risks, low returns, and other bottlenecks. While challenges will always be country-specific, understanding which of them are most ëbindingí (i.e., are the biggest hurdles to investment) is critical to formulate an effective policy response. Such obstacles can be categorized in four overlapping broad areas:

* Challenges internal to the firm ñ foremost a lack of capabilities to be competitive in dynamic or desirable (e.g. green, employment-creating) activities;  
* Challenges external to the firm ñ such as poor infrastructure, or macroeconomic instability (lack of an enabling environment).
* Externalities both negative (pollution or carbon emissions) or positive (positive spillovers from a firmís R&D or training efforts on the rest of the economy) ñ which mean that the firmís incentives are not well aligned with the public good, unless corrected by policies; and 
* Coordination challenges, when investments will only be profitable if other public or private investments take place in parallel ñ this includes investment in project specific infrastructure (such as transport or digital), relevant business services, or other inputs that have to be procured locally. Coordination is a central challenge for sustainable transformations that have a ëdirectioní, where the public sector often has to lead in creating investment opportunities and coordinating public and private resources around a vision.  

To support the overall vision for the economy and address coordination challenges, policies and instruments are typically brought together in a strategy that creates policy certainty and guides public and private investment and action (see Box II.5 for details).

Box II. 5
Sustainable industrial policies ñ a conceptual perspective

Firms often lack technological, organizational, and managerial capabilities to be competitive in dynamic sectors.73 Acquiring capabilities to successfully compete in technologically dynamic sectors and activities is costly and risky, and depends to a significant extent on ëlearning by doingí. Technologies cannot just be acquired; tacit knowledge has to be absorbed and adapted to specific local contexts.74 Firms would initially operate at a loss in activities new to the economy (if not to the world), with profitability highly uncertain, which typically also makes it difficult to secure financing. When the capability gap to international competitors is large, this can lead to so-called ìlearning trapsî, with firms instead pursuing investment opportunities in sectors that require lower capabilities, such as real estate or import trade; but these often have lower productivity growth and fewer positive spillovers and impacts on the rest of the economy.75 In response, sustainable industrial policies can support and incentivize firm learning and innovation by providing firms with concessional financing during the learning period, subsidizing other production inputs, supporting demand, managing competition, and other means (see section 3.3). 

Firms are also faced with significant external constraints. Workers in a country may not have the required skills, particularly in activities new to the local economy; required infrastructure may be poorly developed or absent; the cost of finance is typically high, reflecting not only high risks associated with new activities but also underdeveloped financial markets or macroeconomic instability; and access to other critical inputs may be constrained, e.g. because of underdeveloped local markets and/or lack of foreign exchange. The creation of a broader enabling environment and provision of relevant public goods is thus an important part of this effort. This includes through investments in infrastructure, education and health, stable and growth-oriented macro-policies and exchange rates, measures to improve access to finance, and good governance more broadly. Because private investments typically have impacts on the broader economy and society that are not reflected in market prices or returns to investment for an individual firm, an enabling environment for sustainable industrial transformation also requires  corrective policy intervention to ëinternalizeí the externalities. Such externalities can be positive (the spillover effects from investments in R&D, the ëcost discoveryí that pioneering firms achieve in their domestic economy, paving the way for imitators), or negative (most prominently, pollution), and corrected through subsidies for investment in R&D, or through taxes (e.g. carbon taxes) or regulations (section 3.4). 

There are also often major coordination failures that inhibit investment in sustainable transformation. Often, projects require several simultaneous, large-scale investments ñ e.g. in targeted infrastructure necessary for a specific project, industry-specific services, or provision of other inputs. Individual investors would not take forward investments without having some assurance that complementary upstream or downstream investments will also be made, or relevant infrastructure built, and public institutions set up.76 Coordination challenges can also be exacerbated by powerful incumbent actors (e.g. fossil fuel interests, commodity exporters), who may fiercely resist policy changes they perceive against their interest, which could undermine policy coherence and coordinated actions.77 

Coordination challenges abound in the context of SDG-aligned transformations, climate action or other ëmission-orientedí policy efforts. For example, to achieve rapid decarbonization, many parallel public and private investments and interventions are needed that go far beyond ëfixing market failuresí, but that aim for technological, behavioral, and systemic changes in land use, transportation, housing, energy, industry, and so forth. Such efforts require public leadership (to help develop new technologies, build relevant institutions, and create entirely new markets and investment opportunities).78 To tackle such challenges, countries need an overall vision, e.g. an SDG-aligned transformation plan linked to long-term objectives (such as carbon reduction targets), which can then guide all public policies and investments, and provide policy certainty for firms and investors (see section 3.2).79 



3.2 Strategic approaches 

Countries need to develop coherent strategies to align actions and incentives of all actors with public policy objectives. Sustainable structural transformations depend on buy-in and coordinated actions of many stakeholders - within government and across ministries , between public and private actors, and over time.80 To this end, countries need a clear direction for policymakers, firms and investors, typically spelled out in an industrial development strategy that brings together different actors, instruments, policies, and tools  in a coordinated manner.81 Such strategies can be part of and/or should be closely linked to a countryís national sustainable development strategy; with integrated national financing frameworks (INFFs) a useful vehicle to align financing policies with structural transformation objectives. 

Strategies need to be context-specific and countries should have strong ownership over the industrial policy formulation process. Strategies need to respond to key country-specific challenges, binding constraints and opportunities, which can be identified through a national assessment process. Based on these assessments, countries can spell out prioritized and sequenced actions and initiatives. While external parties, such as foreign experts and consultancy firms, may be able to provide useful advice, they cannot replace the countryís own discovery process of studying challenges and opportunities, consultations with stakeholders, inter-ministerial coordination, and creating consensus. Unless there is a high level of ownership over and commitment to industrial policy formulation, implementation tends to be ineffective and inconsistent across various policies and over time.

Countries need to take into account existing and potentially competing interests of powerful actors. Structural transformations tend to create winners and losers. Overcoming resistance of powerful groups (e.g. fossil fuel interests) is critical, as is the provision of support and retraining to workers that may be left behind. In developed country contexts, the capacity to plan and then coherently implement transformation policies against the resistance of particular interests may be the fundamental constraint to achieving sustainable and inclusive transformations, more binding than availability of financial and technical resources, which exist in abundance but are often not aligned with these objectives.82 Building broad coalitions for change ñ including through transparent consultations with stakeholders as noted above ñ can provide political support.  Identifying and giving political voice to the ëwinnersí can help balance resistance from vested interests, and should be considered in the sequencing of initiatives.83 Policymakers can also identify ëchampionsí of reform efforts, for example by assigning responsibility to a high-level political Figure.84 Social protection systems that enable workers and households to better manage the risks of such transitions and provide a safety net can also build support.

Countries also need to carefully manage public sector relations with the private sector. In cases of successful industrial policies  public actors were able to build close working relationships with private partners (which help governments elicit relevant information), but at the same time retain the capacity to implement policies that investors advocate against and to withdraw support when necessary.85 Getting policy design right is critical but challenging; policies should have success criteria linked to broader development objectives, clear accountability lines and political leadership at a high level, be transparent, and support to firms linked to performance requirements and with sunset clauses .86

Strategies likely need to make use of a more expansive toolkit in the context of sustainable transformations. Because sustainable industrial transformations are ëdirectionalí, these actions and initiatives are likely more expansive than the traditional industrial policy toolkit.  For example, rather than being technology-neutral, strategies aim for the rapid uptake of low-carbon technologies. To this end, supply side policies to push down costs of production for desirable technologies (e.g. subsidies) and targeted public investments (including in basic research) can be complemented by use of technological standards and regulatory frameworks that reduce technology uncertainty, demand-side measures that create further economic incentives for technology adoption. 
3.3 Support to build firm capabilities 

Sustainable industrial policies can support and incentivize firms to build technological and organizational capabilities to be competitive in dynamic sectors. To overcome so-called learning traps, policy makers can use a wide range of tools - providing firms with concessional financing during the learning period, subsidizing other production inputs, supporting demand, managing competition, or other means. The intention is to make initial investments more attractive to support ëlearning by doingí in priority sectors and activities, with the ultimate objective of creating competitive firms.  Since learning is costly for firms and difficult for the state to monitor, firms may be tempted to invest their energies in keeping subsidies and protections in place rather than achieving competitiveness. To avoid this fate, successful industrial policy interventions often combine ëcarrotsí with ësticksí, e.g. in the form of performance requirements that are tied to policy targets or sunset clauses.87

Fiscal instruments

Fiscal instruments such as subsidies and tax incentives remain the most prevalent sustainable industrial policy instruments. Fiscal instruments can be used to incentivize and/or share the costs of risky or uncertain investments, or reduce the cost of initial investment (i.e. tax credits or rebates for capital expenditure). Their effectiveness depends on sound design and how well they are embedded in a broader strategic approach, as discussed above.88 Investment incentives are often tied to performance requirements. In addition to R&D, training or minimum investment requirements, incentives can focus on job creation. To strengthen development of productive linkages of foreign investors with domestic firms, match making activities and other support for local suppliers can be used.

In the pursuit of ëdirectedí transformation, demand-side instruments such as strategic public procurement have become more prominent. Public procurement is a significant part of public expenditure and is increasingly used to achieve sustainable development objectives, such as promoting innovation, sustainability, and social inclusiveness, e.g. through green procurement (see Chapter III.A.). Strategic public procurement can encourage domestic firm development and innovation, and ultimately competitiveness of domestic firms, e.g. through outcome targets aimed at creating a level playing field for local MSMEs, combined with capacity support, or through ëinnovation procurementí. 

Fiscal instruments can be costly and require careful policy design. Tax incentives both to enterprises and households have been estimated to amount to over 5 per cent of GDP in foregone tax revenues in some developing countries.89 This underlines the importance of effective planning and policy design, including: analysis of the total cost of the fiscal tool vs. the long-run benefit, along with a comparison of the cost of other tools to achieve the same goal; tying support to performance; and careful targeting of interventions to support priority activities. In addition, international support can play an important role in countries that are fiscally constrained, including, for example, for interventions that target global priorities such as decarbonization (chapter III.C.). 

Financial instruments 

Public development banks can provide long-term funding for structural transformation.  Public development banks can fill both knowledge and resource gaps.90 They have been a major provider of long-term and affordable finance for firms (see 2022 FSDR). Many also provide funding for new, smaller, or innovative firms, and for priority sectors or activities linked to broader transformation objectives. In addition, they can also develop specific expertise and market intelligence relevant for policymakers, such as for the initial assessment of binding constraints and market failures. (see also Box II.6)
Regulatory measures can also contribute to increasing availability of financing for desired activities. In addition to direct lending by public development banks, countries have also ëdirectedí or incentivized commercial lending through risk sharing mechanisms and regulatory requirements. For example, loan guarantee programmes are widely used to support green technology development. On the regulatory side, quantitative tools were common historically, including ceilings or quotas for bank lending to targeted sectors; they have largely been replaced by price-based measures. These include for example green refinancing tools of Central Banks, which incentivize credit provision for environmentally friendly activities through cheaper refinancing.91 Central Banks have also tied terms of access to lending windows to minimum shares of SME loans in banksí lending portfolios. 92  

Blended finance from international partners can also support sustainable industrial transformation when it is in line with national strategies and plans. The international community has looked to blended finance instruments to bring down financing costs of private investments in developing countries by sharing risks. Blended finance uses public funds to crowd in private finance, with a view to unlock investment that the private sector would not have done on its own in support of national development priorities. Blended finance makes use of instruments similar to those in the industrial policy toolbox, such as guarantees, concessional loans, or equity investments, and it predominantly targets sectors that are core to structural transformation, most prominently clean energy and industry (see Chapter III.C.). Blended finance, mostly provided by international development finance institutions, could thus be an important complement to national efforts, particularly if projects and sectors supported align with national strategies of recipient countries. Embedding blended finance in national industrial policy efforts, e.g. through an INFF, could enhance such alignment and recipient country ownership of blended finance approaches, which has been a challenge to-date. ëJust energy transition partnershipsí could be a promising model of coordinated support by multiple development finance institutions and other partners for country-led transitions (see Box III.C.4). 

Box II. 6
A spotlight on development banks ñ mobilizing resources, balancing risks and rewards, eliciting information 
The history of public development banks is closely linked to industrialization. The first ëprototypeí development finance institutions were set up in 19th century continental Europe to fund rapid industrialization; the setting up of such institutions peaked in the decades after World War Two, with efforts from developing countries across the world to achieve rapid structural transformation.93

Most development banks seek to maximize sustainable development impact (depending on their specific mandates), while also maintaining financial viability. Throughout their history, development banks have provided four functions undersupplied by markets. They have: i) extended credit countercyclically, stabilizing financial markets in times of crisis; ii) funded strategic developmental investments, e.g. in public goods such as infrastructure; iii) provided financing for innovations to SMEs that cannot fund such investments from their balance sheets; and iv) funded major public policy plans (ëmissionsí), such as energy transitions in Germany or China.94 Development banks generally take into account factors beyond financial viability in their lending decisions. For example, the Korean Small and Medium Business Corporation (SBC) assesses technological and business viability and growth potential of SMEs in its corporate evaluations.95

Public development banks that are able to retain equity in their investments (or design equity-like instruments) are particularly well placed to finance investments in innovation because of their ability to diversify across investments. Public banks (or public or semi-public venture capital funds) can capture the upside of successful investments, which can help compensate for losses to be expected in a risky and highly uncertain innovation investment portfolio.96 

Development banks can also help identify market failures through their routine activities of loan-screening and lending, and can use this information to provide inputs for the design of other structural transformation policy instruments. This orchestrating role can accompany their more traditional place in addressing financial constraints and crowding-in a diverse set of financing actors.97

Other measures to strengthen firm capabilities 

There is a wide range of additional measures that policy makers can consider to strengthen firm capabilities.  These include training activities for technological and entrepreneurial skills, support for producer associations, or public technology intermediaries such as public research centers. Public research centers which are often underfunded, can provide technology and national quality infrastructure, and also work directly with firms through consultancy, training, and market opportunity analysis.98

Supporting upgrading and linkages has also been the main objective of strategic trade policy. Tariffs to protect ëinfant industriesí from international competition, and local content requirements were once the main instrument of industrial policy to allow firms time to develop ëlearning by doingí. With deeper trade integration, such policies have to be more nimble ñ targeting upgrading in specific activities and value chains rather than entire sectors and using import protections more prudently, based on a sound understanding of targeted value chains and lead firmsí strategies.99

3.4 Creating an enabling environment for sustainable industrial transformations 

To address external constraints faced by firms, policymakers need to invest in the creation of an enabling environment for sustainable industrial transformation. This includes a general enabling business environment, such as regulatory frameworks (including competition policies), investments in infrastructure, education and health, addressing credit constraints, stable and growth-oriented macro-policies and competitive exchange rates, and good governance more broadly (see chapter III.B). These are sometimes referred to as ëhorizontalí policies because they benefit most firms and are not explicitly targeted at specific sectors. In practice countries do not have sufficient resources for all infrastructure investments and are ëdoomed to chooseí in how they prioritize public investments. Even such ëhorizontalí policies should thus be coordinated with industrial policies and related structural transformation objectives.100 They also have to ëinternalizeí pervasive externalities that hamper sustainable transformations ñ fiscal systems have to set the right incentives for private actors, e.g. through carbon taxes, removal of fossil fuel subsidies, or removal of biases in the tax code against labour, along with accompanying regulatory measures (such as energy efficiency standards). 

Efforts to strengthen the overall enabling environment for business and investment should be aligned with sustainable transformation objectives. Investment and trade facilitation are key aspects of industrial policy packages. Investment facilitation measures typically focus on transparency and better information provision for potential investors, addressing administrative hurdles for investors, or a more predictable and stable policy environment.101 Trade facilitation aims at more efficient border procedures, and improvements in trade-related infrastructure. Such measures should be supportive of sustainable transformation objectives, e.g. by taking priority sectors and activities into account in sequencing of policy actions. Countries have increasingly used these principally horizontal tools to prioritize facilitation efforts in specific sectors, or to promote technological upgrading.  

Public investments in sustainable infrastructure, education, research and development are key for overcoming supply-side bottlenecks. In most countries that achieved sustained, rapid industrial growth, public investment played a crucial role in crowding-in private-sector investment.102 This includes investments in sustainable infrastructure, education, skills development and training, and public research and development. The public sector is typically a main and direct funder of investment in basic and applied research, and public investment in this area has also facilitated the pursuit of public policy goals ñ mission-oriented institutions have made critical contributions to technological breakthroughs, e.g. in renewable energy; labour-augmenting technologies could be made a priority in publicly funded research103  (see chapter III.G). 

Public expenditure should also ensure that transformations are inclusive and leave no one behind. For poor and vulnerable households, industrial transformations may be associated with increased risk of marginalization, rather than growing economic opportunities, unless they receive support. Education and training programmes should not only aim to build relevant skills for new sectors and occupations, but focus in particular on those workers that may lose jobs in the context of transformation processes, and remove barriers to education for women, as well as migrants and other marginalized groups. Social protection systems can also play a key role in this regard: they can provide a safety net for those that may have lost income opportunities, but also enable people to take up potentially risky opportunities in new sectors and activities. This calls not just for strengthening of social protection systems, but also for targeted efforts ñ e.g. for rural populations and for rural-urban migrants (see also Box II.7).104 

Box II. 7
Structural transformation needs to be just and inclusive ñ Global Accelerator on Jobs and Social Protection

Structural transformation is inherently a process of creative destruction that needs to be carefully managed to ensure inclusive outcomes and a just transition. This entails coherent policy action that creates new productive jobs and expands social protection coverage for those who risk being left behind in the transition. To be actionable, these policies will need to be financed, through national efforts and international development cooperation. The institutional structures at the country level will also need to be strengthened to manage the transition in partnership with international and multilateral institutions.
 
These pillars of policy coherence, financing frameworks, and multilateral cooperation constitute the core of the Global Accelerator on Jobs and Social Protection for Just Transitions launched by the United Nations Secretary-General in 2021. The ambition of the Global Accelerator is to bring together member States, international financial institutions, social partners, civil society and the private sector to help countries create 400 million decent jobs, including in the green, digital and care economies, and to extend social protection coverage to the 4 billion people currently excluded, many of which are migrant workers in the informal economy.

The Global Accelerator provides a vehicle for putting plans into action by supporting the design, implementation and monitoring of integrated national strategies and policies that combine investments in decent jobs, sustainable development and universal social protection. At the initial stage, the Global Accelerator will be implemented in a selected number of pathfinder countries.

Source: ILO

Financial sector development and macroeconomic policies  

Lack of access to long-term finance is a key constraint facing firms, particularly when investing in innovation and/or new sectors and activities critical to sustainable transformation. Many investments that are critical to firmsí growth, such as purchases of fixed assets or equipment, are long-term investments, hence the need for long-term financing.105 Accessing financing on such terms can be a major challenge. The financial sector tends to have short-term incentives (see Box II.8); lenders are  reluctant to provide credit to borrowers about which they have very limited information (SMEs, investments in innovation); and neither commercial banks nor capital markets are likely to provide sufficient financing for investing in entirely new markets or for specific ëmission-orientedí projects, due to the long time horizons involved, the public benefit which generally cannot be monetized, and intrinsic uncertainty about future returns.106 

These challenges are exacerbated in developing countries, resulting in more firms either excluded from external financing, or else subject to expensive borrowing terms. Even countries with deep financial markets face critical gaps, for example in funding for investment in basic research and development or in SME lending. But this is exacerbated in developing countries with underdeveloped financial markets. For example, small manufacturing enterprises could play an important role in a sustainable industrial transformation, but in Sub-Saharan Africa and LDCs only 15.7 per cent and 17 per cent of these enterprises have access to financial services, well below the global average (SDG indicator 9.3.2) (see Chapter III.B). This divide is also visible in the terms of finance that are available. Banks provide significantly more long-term lending in developed countries than they do in low-income and least developed countries.107 And financing is more expensive: economy-wide costs of capital have been estimated to be up to seven times higher in developing countries than in the United States and Europe.108 In addition to specific and targeted instruments to bring down the cost of capital discussed above, financial sector development and macro-policies can help address these challenges.  

Box II. 8
Has ëfinancializationí undermined real capital formation and industrial transformation? 

Financialization is typically defined as an increasing size and influence of the financial sector relative to the economy, as well as an increase in financial transactions, such as speculative investments, by corporations, governments, and households.109 Financialization is most visible in developed countries, with the picture in the developing world variegated. But its impacts are felt globally through financial globalization: changes from bank-based finance towards liquid capital markets, which allows for greater leverage; the significant growth of international capital markets, stimulated by the growth of institutional investors; and the liberalization of cross-border financial flows. 

There is increasing evidence that, above a threshold, financial sector growth increases inequality and financial instability,110 and, critical for sustainable transformations, lowers real capital formation and growth prospects:,  
* Financialization may negatively impact productive investment and operational activities of companies.  For example, instead of reinvesting in business development, companies have used share buybacks to boost stock prices, with buybacks exceeding capital expenditure in some years in the United States.111 In developing countries, greater external vulnerability and macroeconomic volatility provide motives for more liquid holdings by firms.
* In addition, in countries with liquid capital markets, elevated returns on highly leveraged financial assets can divert productive investment to financial investment. In periods of low interest rates, long-term investment is backed by short-term borrowing (or leverage), which increases the return for every dollar invested as long as market prices rise. As a result, even so-called long-term investors, such as pension funds, may limit purchases of illiquid assets (such as infrastructure), since they want to be able to sell assets when interest rates rise and the leveraged position is no longer profitable. 
* There is evidence that increased short-termism reduces investments in innovation and R&D, with firms engaging in less radical innovation and achieving fewer break-throughs.112
* Boom and bust cycles of capital flows can also undermine the development of high-value adding export-oriented activities because of unfavorable exchange rate dynamics. Manufacturing employment, manufacturing share of GDP, and economic complexity contract during periods of strong net capital (non-FDI) inflows, particularly in developing countries.113 
* In developing countries, this is exacerbated by volatile capital flows, making the financial system overall more prone to short-termism and less likely to finance long-term investment.114 In countries vulnerable to capital flight, and especially in conditions of tight global liquidity, even public development banks may find it hard to provide patient capital domestically.

Source: UN DESA, based on Bonizzi, Kaltenbrunner, Powell (2023)115 and the 2019 FSDR

Bringing down the cost of capital requires domestic and international action. Higher costs of capital in part reflect the greater (perceived and actual) risk that investors are exposed to in developing countries, including political risks, poor contract enforcement and limited information about clientsí creditworthiness, and macroeconomic risk. Tackling these underlying challenges ñ improving the domestic enabling environment ñ is an important aspect of financial sector development and expanding the availability of long-term finance. But domestic factors alone cannot fully explain risk premia. As discussed in last yearís FSDR, developing countries have historically faced high sovereign credit spreads (interest costs above US Treasuries) for their borrowing in international markets, even after adjusting for defaults and risks (as measured by volatility). With sovereign rates usually providing a ëfloorí for borrowing costs of firms, this translates into higher costs of capital for corporate and project financing (see also 2022 FSDR, chapter III.B). As global factors have become increasingly important in determining capital flows and their volatility, policy actions are needed at the global (see Box II.8 and chapter III.E); they also provide additional rationale for scaling up international concessional lending (Chapter III.C).

The macroeconomic environment is a major determinant of the cost of capital and of prospects for sustainable transformation; macroeconomic policies should thus be aligned with and supportive of transformation objectives. Investment-centered macro-policy frameworks geared toward facilitating sustainable industrial transformations should target both stability and the balanced expansion of supply capacities and aggregate demand.116 Such approaches can build on recent developments: in response to growing systemic risks, including from the pandemic and climate change, there has been a greater appreciation of macroeconomic policy frameworks that support inclusive growth and productive employment, address inequality and climate change, and are better prepared for shocks (see 2022 FSDR). Fiscal and monetary policy toolkits are being expanded accordingly, with countries considering additional fiscal measures for climate investments and incorporating climate risks into monetary policies. 

The specific elements of such a pro-structural transformation macroeconomic policy framework will vary depending on country circumstances. Policies will differ depending on country needs and circumstances and shifting political, economic, environmental, and social realities. Box II.9 presents some options. 

Box II. 9
Macro-policy options to support sustainable industrial transformations

Periods of sustained growth in developing countries have often coincided with undervalued real exchange rates, which facilitated reallocation of resources towards dynamic tradable sectors.117 Noncompetitive exchange rates are a challenge in natural-resource rich developing countries in particular118; dependence on resource exports undermines prospects for diversification, which in turn exacerbates vulnerability to terms of trade shocks and macroeconomic volatility.119 To achieve a stable and competitive real exchange rate, countries can try to smooth boom and bust cycles in external financing, for example through macroprudential policies. Macroprudential measures help dampen both domestic financial cycles and capital flow volatility. ìPre-emptiveî and countercyclical measures aimed at dampening excessive portfolio inflows during boom times can lower the risk of sudden stops during crises and reduce exchange rate volatility120 (see Chapter III.F). Commodity exporters can also manage commodity price fluctuations, e.g. through stabilization funds.121 

Managing exchange rate volatility has become more challenging in an era of financial globalization. Building up of foreign exchange reserves can provide a degree of self-insurance for countries, in addition to supporting competitive exchange rates, but is costly and may be insufficient to reduce vulnerability of to the volatility of international capital flows.122 This underlines the importance of international action: further strengthening the international financial safety net, monetary policy coordination of major central banks, and their greater consideration of macroprudential financial sector regulations (see Chapter III.F).

Where possible, fiscal policies should support scaling up public investments and the provision of public goods, e.g. by targeting minimum levels of productive public investments. Investments should be sequenced to prioritize high sustainable development impact and alleviation of critical supply constraints.123 This could include, for example, employment-intensive public investment in resilient infrastructure. To be fiscally sustainable, such expansion of public investment must go hand in hand with increasing effectiveness of public investment, mobilization of additional domestic resources (see Chapter III.A.), and, for many developing countries, concessional financing. 

Fiscal policies should also overcome ëprocyclicality trapsí. Counter-cyclical fiscal policy should work hand-in-hand with monetary policy to both stabilize economic activity and support growth and sustainable development in the longer run. For example, unemployment insurance and social protection are countercyclical measures because they support demand during economic slowdowns. Capital expenditure tends to be particularly pro-cyclical, rising during booms and falling during economic slowdowns when investment is most needed. Protecting green and other productive investments through business cycles is key to enhance supply capacity over time; through pre-approved public investments, capital spending could be expanded in downturns. 

Many Central Banks already have dual policy mandates, such as price stability and full employment, and set policy rates accordingly. The United States Federal Reserve System has had such a mandate since 1978. The mandate of the Reserve Bank of New Zealand includes ìmaximum sustainable employmentî in addition to price stability. While not explicit mandates, several central banks in developing countries, including in Asia (such as Bangladesh, Bhutan, Fiji, Pakistan, the Philippines and Thailand) identify the broader objectives of supporting inclusive economic growth, financial inclusion or development in their vision or mission statements.124 Such broader of monetary policy objectives (beyond price stability) is relevant in developing country contexts, where inflation is more commonly driven by external shocks and other cost factors rather than excessive demand. Strict inflation targeting is difficult to maintain in such circumstances; instead policy responses may for example need to include supply-side measures.125

More recently, many Central Banks have taken steps to ëgreení their monetary policies, in recognition of the risks that climate change poses for price and financial market stability. This has led to explicit consideration of climate risks in monetary policies, e.g. by taking into account carbon intensity in asset purchasing programmes, or through collateral rules that incentivize green lending by providing cheaper refinancing to banks for such lending (see also Chapter III.F). 

3.5 Additional enablers - state capabilities, international enabling environments and international support

State capabilities 

Effectively supporting industrial transformations requires specific technical, operational, and political capabilities in the public sector. Developing relevant skills in public agencies is an important feature of structural transformation strategies. In so-called ëdevelopmental statesí, bureaucracies were often organized around a central leading entity, led by an elite corps of civil servants with significant autonomy, such as the Ministry of International Trade and Industry in Japan.126 In lower-capability settings, industrial policy coordination and delivery has often succeeded by creating ëpockets of effectivenessí. These could be agencies outside the regular bureaucracy that are able to attract highly skilled personal, such as development banks, or delivery units under direct authority of high-level officials. Such delivery units can follow-up on implementation, prioritize, assess, flag bottlenecks, and solve problems in dialogue with all relevant actors. 

State capability constraints can be partially addressed through smart policy design. All countries already have a variety of financing policies in place, along with areas of expertise and competence in existing institutions. Interventions should be designed to build on these existing capacities. Industrial transformation policies can also be designed to mitigate against existing constraints. One way to do so is to reduce the ìfailure dimensionalityî of policies, by keeping the number of components of a specific initiative or policy package low, and/or by focusing on key binding constraints such as managerial abilities or access to long-term financing.127 Phased approaches can also be considered, especially in countries with more limited managerial skills. 

Countries should aim to develop ëdynamic capabilitiesí ñ to continue to learn from initial efforts. To achieve sustainable transformations and shape and create new markets, policy makers will ëdiscoverí policy solutions, learn from failures and allow for policy experimentation, evaluation, and revision.128 This is a challenge in both developed and developing countries, as public institutions are typically not set up to experiment. But some institutions may be better placed than others, and could be prioritized for capacity support: public development banks, public-private consultation bodies, or entities specifically set up to engage with the private sector may have more flexible rules and more capacity to experiment, learn, and adapt.129

International enabling environments 

Countries need to preserve existing and, in some areas, regain lost policy space to pursue sustainable industrial policies. Trade, investment and technology policies typically have spillovers across national borders. The international rules and agreements that aim to balance national interests and negative spillovers have come under scrutiny in response to changes in trade relations and technologies, and new challenges such as climate change and the SDGs.

Trade-related industrial policies can have both positive (e.g. diffusion of innovation across borders) and negative spillovers (e.g. firms relocating production in response to trade barriers or subsidies). International trade agreements and rules aim to balance the right to pursue domestic policy objectives with avoiding negative spillovers. This is embodied in WTO principles such as non-discrimination, transparency, market-based resource allocation, combined with policy space for addressing societal concerns (see also Chapter III.D.). At the same time, emerging global issues such as tackling climate change and achieving the SDGs, the rise of global value chains, different roles of the state in economies, as well as recent announcements of new subsidy programs in some major economies, covering key sectors such as electric vehicles, renewable energy, and semiconductors, have led to calls to increase multilateral dialogue and potentially adapt current multilateral rules, e.g. in regard to subsidies. The strong agglomeration effects observed in a digitalized economy have provided additional weight to these calls. While these questions should be urgently addressed at the global level to ensure level playing fields, it is also important to note that many policies remain permissible even under current rules.130

International investment agreements (IIA), treaties to regulate conditions for cross-border investments, grant foreign investors certain protections and benefits, with a view to attract investments. While they typically do not target specific sectors or activities, IIAs can support broader industrial policy efforts, e.g. by improving the investment policy framework. At the same time, they can restrict use of typical industrial policy instruments, e.g. performance requirements or subsidies. In recognition of the need for countriesí regulatory space to pursue the SDGs and climate action, reform of the investment treaty regime is accelerating, and newly concluded IIAs feature many reformed provisions, including provisions on gender equality, human rights and climate action (see also Chapter III.D.). The latter in particular has increased the urgency of IIA reform, with investors using agreements to challenge climate action and green industrial policy measures.131 

Intellectual property rights increase returns to and thus should provide economic incentives for investment in innovation but can constrain diffusion of technologies.132 With most developing countries importing technologies, they would tend to benefit less from strong IPR regimes that increase costs for follow-on inventors. Their legislation should thus make full use of the flexibilities in international agreements to allow reverse engineering and technological diffusion (see Chapter III.G.). At the international level, cooperative IPR arrangements, such as patent pooling, cross-licensing, and technology-standards agreements, have been used in the health sector, and should also be considered for low-carbon and other SDG-critical technologies that can be considered global public goods.  Global research collaboration efforts should be strengthened (see also Chapter III.G.).

International support

Developing countries, and LDCs in particular, will also require capacity and financial support. To build public sector capabilities, capacity development efforts should be further scaled up. Knowledge exchange and South-South cooperation could play an important role, with functionaries receiving training and observing practices in other countries a potentially cost-effective measure. Financial support is also critical ñ long-term concessional financing for developing countries to carry out public investments in sustainable transformations must be scaled up significantly, as recognized for example in the SDG Stimulus put forward by the Secretary-General. Multilateral development banks are uniquely positioned to facilitate such investments, with their ability to provide long-term financing with interest costs significantly below commercial rates; financing provided on such terms is particularly suitable for investments in sustainable transformations, which can stimulate growth, generate employment, and ultimately enhance countriesí fiscal capacity and improve debt sustainability. Blended finance can also play a productive role in this regard, when tied to national priorities and plans (see Box II.10 for the role of migrants, and Chapter III.C). 

Box II. 10
The role of migrants and the diaspora

Developing countries could also look to tap the financial economic and social capital of its migrants and diaspora. The diaspora can establish new businesses and pass on capabilities they acquired in the countries of their workplace through skills mentoring and knowledge transfer, allowing countries to establish a foothold in new productive industries and establishing trade links between countries of origin and destination. Policymakers can facilitate diaspora investment through the provision of specialised accounts, dedicated support by inward investment agencies, as well as an enabling policy and business environment. 

Source: IOM

2024 FSDR - Chapter 2
II.	The global economic context and its implications for sustainable development

1.	Introduction

At the midpoint for achieving the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, the world economy is lacking dynamism and grappling with an array of risks and challenges. After a period of rapid economic expansion early in the millennium, the global economy’s momentum has waned since, creating a challenging environment for financing development. Global investment, trade and productivity growth all decelerated, amidst a series of major crises and economic and non-economic shocks, spanning from the 2007/2008 food price crisis and the 2008 financial and economic crisis to the recent COVID-19 pandemic and escalating geopolitical conflicts. Hard-earned development gains have been reversed, particularly in poor and vulnerable countries, which have yet to fully recover from the pandemic shock; these countries are also most affected by ever-increasing climate challenges that jeopardize people’s lives, health, and productivity, and pose substantial economic tail risks. 

In this highly challenging environment, the global economic outlook remains fragile, with growth prospects subdued. The world economy avoided the worst-case scenario of a recession in 2023, with growth estimated at 2.7 per cent. But global growth, on a market exchange rate basis, is projected to slow to 2.4 per cent in 2024, before experiencing a moderate improvement to 2.7 per cent in 2025,  and is expected to remain weak in the medium term, amidst subdued investment and high levels of debt. Downside risks include commodity price spikes and supply disruptions due to conflicts and further escalation of geopolitical tensions, a prolonged period of tight financing conditions, persistent inflation, and trade fragmentation. On the other hand, faster disinflation could ease financing conditions; a less-contractionary-than-expected fiscal stance across countries, as well as stronger economic performance of major economies provide additional upside risks to the forecasts.

The global shift in monetary policy since 2022 – from ultra-loose to restrictive stances – has exacerbated public finance pressures and is weighing on investment prospects. Globally synchronized monetary tightening to address surging inflationary pressure in 2022 has resulted in more restrictive global financial conditions and pushed up borrowing costs. While global inflation declined in 2023, real policy interest rates are expected to remain elevated for some time, due to concerns over a resurgence of inflationary pressures. Against this backdrop, many developing countries are expected to face constrained access to international financial markets and elevated borrowing costs, which will likely limit countries’ capacity to invest in the SDGs, boost long-term productivity, and combat climate change.

To boost investment and improve medium-term growth and sustainable development prospects, national actions and international cooperation must be stepped up. Comprehensive national policy packages that foster macroeconomic stability and promote structural transformations have shown to be effective at driving investment.  At the same time, greater global cooperation is more important than ever, across the action areas of the Addis Agenda, to reduce debt distress and provide relief where needed, facilitate trade integration and technology transfer, alleviate food insecurity, scale up climate finance and stimulate investment in the SDGs. Without a concerted effort, the world faces a protracted period of weak investment, slow growth, and high debt service burdens, which would put the SDGs out of reach. 
2.	Global and regional growth trends and outlook

The past twenty years have been marked by several large crises alongside major shifts in the geopolitical and economic landscape. In the early 2000s, the global economy experienced a period of significant expansion, driven by globalization, advancements in technology, and robust economic growth in large developing countries, notably China and India. The rise in global demand during this period fuelled a commodity boom. Global trade activities were also buoyed by the proliferation of global value chains, as well as key milestones in trade liberalization, including China’s accession to the World Trade Organization in 2001 as well as the earlier formation of the European Union in 1995. Against this backdrop, global foreign direct investment (FDI) flows grew rapidly. This strong performance came to a halt in 2008. Developed economies were hit hard by the 2008 crisis, which caused severe recessions and massive job losses. A prolonged period of deficient demand combined with stagnant productivity growth raised fears of economic stagnation. Developing economies initially demonstrated resilience, but the crisis reverberated across the world and affected global financial markets and trade. The decade following it was eventually characterized by a noticeable slowdown in growth across developed and developing economies. In 2020, the COVID-19 pandemic then sent the world economy into a free fall, triggering the most severe global economic crisis in the past century (figure II.1). 

Figure II.1 
Global growth, 1995-2025
Percentage
 
Source: UN/DESA, based on estimates and forecasts produced with the UN DESA World Economic Forecasting Model.
Note: f = forecasts.

Over the past four years, a series of severe and mutually reinforcing shocks have led to a substantial reversal in development progress, particularly for some of the world’s poorest countries. The COVID-19 pandemic exposed systemic vulnerabilities in the world economy, while inflicting extensive damage on lives and livelihoods. By the end of 2023, nearly 7 million people had lost their lives directly due to the virus.   The pandemic triggered the worst global economic crisis since the Great Depression, as widespread mobility restrictions led to a collapse in consumer spending and investment, massive job losses, and severe disruptions to global supply chains. Recovery from the crisis was uneven and more subdued in developing countries, due to slower vaccination progress and more limited macro-policy support in countries with very limited fiscal and monetary policy space. The war in Ukraine in early 2022 then exacerbated rising prices and led to a global cost-of-living crisis. Acute supply disruptions drove food and energy prices to record levels, disproportionately impacting the most vulnerable populations. As global inflation surged to a two-decade high, central banks worldwide tightened monetary policy stances in efforts to rein in inflationary pressures. The aggressive pace of interest rate hikes by the United States Federal Reserve generated spillovers on developing countries, with many experiencing bouts of sizeable capital outflows and currency depreciations. For many developing countries, the sharp tightening of global financial conditions has intensified debt vulnerabilities and balance of payment pressures. 

Against this backdrop of lingering risks and uncertainties, global growth is expected to weaken further in 2024 before picking up modestly in 2025. The United Nations World Economic Situation and Prospects 2024 projects that global growth will decelerate to 2.4 per cent in 2024, from 2.7 per cent in 2023. Growth is forecast to improve moderately to 2.7 per cent in 2025 but will remain below the pre-pandemic average growth rate of 3.1 per cent. A protracted period of low growth would make a full recovery of pandemic losses ever more elusive for vulnerable countries. Indeed, in 2023, the cumulative output losses from recent crises – calculated as the sum of the annual difference between pre-pandemic projections of GDP and actual GDP – amounted to about 40 per cent of the 2019 GDP in the small island developing States (SIDS) and about 30 per cent in the least developed countries (LDCs) (figure II.2).

Figure II.2
Cumulative output losses relative to pre-pandemic projections, 2020-2023

(a) Country groupings
(Percentage of 2019 GDP)
 	(b) Developing regions
(Percentage of 2019 GDP)
 
Source: UN DESA, based on estimates produced with the UN DESA World Economic Forecasting Model.
Notes: e = estimates. Cumulative output losses are calculated as the sum of the annual difference between actual GDP levels and pre-pandemic GDP projections.

While immediate risks to the global outlook appear more balanced, downside risks remain and prospects are subpar in the medium term. Global inflation is projected to moderate further. Fiscal stances that are less contractionary than expected across countries, as well as faster growth in China and sustained growth in the United States would also lift growth prospects. On the other hand, there are several major downside risks that threaten short-and medium-term prospects. First, energy and food prices could surge again due to escalating conflicts and the increasing likelihood of climate shocks. Major central banks could keep interest rates “higher for longer” as inflation risks remain. This would weigh on aggregate demand and further increase debt sustainability risks. Second, global merchandise trade and global industrial production remain exceptionally weak amid cyclical and structural headwinds. This weakness is partly attributable to tighter financial conditions and a continued shift towards spending on services, but it also reflects heightened economic and trade policy uncertainties associated with geopolitical tensions and fragmentation. A more fragmented global economy poses risk to production efficiency and spillovers of technology and knowledge, which – together with subdued investment – would dampen medium-term growth prospects. The International Monetary Fund estimates that geoeconomic fragmentation could cause a permanent world gross product loss of 7 per cent through disruptions in trade alone.  Third, and relatedly, digitalization and related frontier technologies such as artificial intelligence have the potential to stimulate global growth, but digitalization gaps persist between developed and the developing countries, due to lack of required infrastructure, technology equipment, and human resources and expertise.  Such digital divide will affect people’s access to the benefits of technologies and risk further exacerbating economic and social divides. Fourth, the ever-increasing adverse impacts of climate change pose a major risk to global development, especially for vulnerable countries such as LDCs and SIDS, which are already facing severe economic challenges and have limited fiscal space to respond. 

Poverty, hunger, and inequality

The highly challenging macroeconomic environment threatens to significantly set back global poverty eradication. Over the past two decades, tremendous progress has been achieved in alleviating poverty across the world. Between 2000 and 2019, the number of people living in extreme poverty ($2.15 per day or less) globally declined from 1.8 billion to 701 million.  However, even before the pandemic, the pace of progress was slowing. Between 2015 and 2019, global poverty rate fell by around 0.54 percentage points by year, less than half the reduction observed between 2000 and 2014. The pandemic, the war in Ukraine and the global energy and food price shock then reversed gains, with an additional 75 million to 95 million people being pushed into extreme poverty in 2022 relative to pre-pandemic baseline forecasts.  While global poverty declined marginally in 2023,  progress has been highly uneven. Average poverty rates in lower-middle-income, upper-middle-income, and high-income countries moved closer to pre-pandemic levels. By contrast, poverty rates were still well above pre-pandemic levels in low-income countries, particularly those in Africa and the Middle East.  These trends are mirrored in per capita GDP growth rates (see figure II.3): a significant deceleration across regions after 2008, and lagging performance in Africa in particular, which saw average GDP per capita increased by less than 1 per cent annually over the last 15 years. Overall, the World Bank projects that by the end of 2024, people in about one out of every four developing countries and about 40 per cent of low-income countries will still be poorer than they were in 2019.  Without significantly faster economic growth and targeted measures for supporting livelihoods, enhancing social protection and addressing inequality, poverty eradication will remain elusive in many low-income countries. 
 

Figure II.3
Average annual GDP per capita growth, by region, select years during 2000-2025
Percentage 
 
Source: UN/DESA, based on estimates and forecasts produced with the UN DESA World Economic Forecasting Model.

Elevated food prices have been a significant driver of food insecurity in developing countries. In 2023, an estimated 238 million people experienced acute food insecurity, an increase of 21.6 million people from the previous year. The rise in food prices have disproportionately affected the poorest households, which spend a larger share of their income on food. 

The overlapping crises have exacerbated inequalities between and within countries. Across countries, Governments’ capacity to provide fiscal support and roll out COVID-19 vaccines was very uneven. Within countries, there are significant disparities in households’ ability to shield themselves from job and income losses during recent crises. Education losses for disadvantaged students could have lasting effect on their future earnings and reduce intergenerational mobility.  
3.	Deterioration in public finances
Public finances have deteriorated over the past decade. Since the year 2000, fiscal deficits have expanded in both advanced economies as well as emerging markets and developing economies (figure II.4a), particularly during the 2008 world financial and economic crisis and the COVID-19 pandemic, as many countries increased public expenditures to cushion their economies from adverse effects of crises and stimulate growth. With fiscal revenues as a share of GDP stagnating or even falling in several regions since 2010 (figure II.4b), countries have relied on borrowing to finance their growing spending needs. Ultra-loose global financial conditions in the aftermath of the 2008 world financial and economic crisis allowed many low-income and lower-middle-income countries to access international financial markets, many for the first time, albeit at higher interest rates, and caused a significant expansion of global public debt (see Chapter III.E.). 


Figure II.4
Trends of public finances

(a) Fiscal deficits, by country group, 2000-2023
(Percentage of GDP)
 	(b) General government revenue, by region, select years during 2000-2023
(Percentage of GDP)
 
 (c) General government gross debt, by region, select years during 2000-2023
(Percentage of GDP)
 
Source: UN DESA, based on data from the IMF World Economic Outlook database, October 2023.
Note: Regional groups follow the source.
 

Figure II.5
External debt stocks, by region, 2000 versus 2022
(Billions of United States dollars)
 
Source: UN DESA, based on data from the World Bank International Debt Statistics, available at https://databank.worldbank.org/source/international-debt-statistics# (accessed on 31 December 2023).
Note: Regional groups follow the source.

Developing countries’ debt challenges are compounded by high interest rates and debt service burdens. While global inflation eased significantly in 2023, major developed country central banks have signalled their intension to keep interest rates higher for longer; real policy interest rate may remain elevated for some time. A prolonged period of tighter credit conditions will keep borrowing costs for developing countries at a high level, exacerbating debt sustainability risks, and adding to debt service burdens (see figure II.5, figure II.6, and chapter III.E.). High and growing debt-service burdens could further constrain fiscal space at a time when developing countries need to mobilize financial resources to stimulate investment and growth, address climate change-related risks, and accelerate progress towards the SDGs. 
 

Figure II.6
Government interest expenditures in developing countries, 2010-2023
(Number of countries) 								(Percentage)
 
Source: UN DESA, based on data from the IMF World Economic Outlook database, October 2023.
Notes: LHS = left-hand scale; RHS = right-hand scale. Net interest payments of the general Government equal the total amount of domestic and external interest expenses incurred from loans and other forms of borrowing minus any interest income received.
4.	Monetary and financial stability risks
Global monetary policy has seen major shifts in the past two decades amid the introduction of new frameworks and instruments. In the United States, for instance, as the world financial and economic crisis took hold in 2008, the Federal Reserve was quick to slash interest rates, taking them to nearly zero in December 2008 (figure II.7a). In the face of a systemic financial crisis at the zero lower bound, the Federal Reserve then turned to alternative and unconventional tools, particularly quantitative easing (QE),  to provide liquidity, restore confidence, and stimulate the economy. The outbreak of the COVID-19 forced it to cut rates again to near zero and conduct quantitative easing. The size of the Federal Reserve’s assets peaked at early $9 trillion in April 2022, compared with $890.7 billion in January 2008 (figure II.7b). Europe experienced similar monetary policy episodes, while in Japan, the central bank has kept interest rate low and maintained a negative rate since 2016 amid economic stagnation and deflation. Policy rates in developing countries – while at higher levels – largely tracked those of the central banks in major economies (figure II.8).   

The prolonged period of “easy money” came to an end as major central banks responded to the return of high inflation in 2021. Major developed country central banks began to raise interest rates in 2021 and 2022.  Although inflation slowed considerably in 2023, major central banks have signalled their intention to keep interest rates “higher for longer”. In addition to rate hikes, major developed country central banks have also started selling off assets on their balance sheets – pursuing a process known as quantitative tightening (QT) – to reduce liquidity in the financial market. 




Figure II.7
Monetary policies in selected major developed countries
(a) Policy rates, 2000-2023
(Percentage)
 	(b) Assets of central banks’ balance sheets, 2008-2023
(Trillions of United States dollar)
 
Source: Panel (a): UN DESA, based on Trading Economics (accessed on 1 January 2024). Panel (b): UN DESA, based on based on data from the Federal Reserve, European Central Bank, Bank of England, Bank of Japan, CEIC and Trading Economics (accessed on 30 October 2023).
Note: Panel (b): All assets of the Bank of England, Bank of Japan and European Central Bank are converted into United States dollars by using the exchange rates on 31 August 2023.

Monetary policies in major developed countries have significant spillover effects on developing countries, with synchronized tightening since 2022 constraining policy space for developing country central banks. Low interest rates and ultra-loose monetary policies after 2008 prompted large capital flows to developing countries, lowering sovereign spreads during this period (figure II.9).  However, capital flows remained very volatile throughout this period, experiencing significant fluctuations and later a downward trend, with significant outflows during and since the pandemic, amidst the tightening of global financing conditions. The resulting rising interest rate spreads and currency weakness have exacerbated debt sustainability risks for many developing countries in 2022-2023, and are limiting monetary policy space. Higher interest rates in developed countries will continue to increase the debt-servicing burden of developing countries, particularly those with high levels of dollar- or euro-denominated public debt. And many developing country central banks may be restricted in lowering interest rates to support growth even when inflation pressures ease, as that could lead to capital outflows, currency depreciations, increased risk premia, and further heightened debt sustainability risks. 
 

Figure II.8
Policy rates in developing economies (median), 2000-2023
(Percentage) 
 
Source: UN DESA, based on CEIC data (accessed on 2 January 2023). 
Notes: The last observation of the data is November 2023. 54 developing country central banks are covered. However, country coverage may differ between years due to data availability.

Figure II.9
Capital flows to developing countries, Q1 2000-Q2 2023
(Billions of United States dollar)
 
Source: UN DESA, based on the IMF Balance of Payments and International Investment Position Statistics, available at https://data.imf.org/?sk=7a51304b-6426-40c0-83dd-ca473ca1fd52 (accessed on 2 January 2024).
Note: 33 developing countries are covered based on available data. 
5.	Weak investment prospects
Investment growth – a key driver of long-term productivity – has slowed over the past two decades, particularly in developing countries. As figure II.10 shows, growth of gross fixed capital formation in the world accelerated during the first half of the 2000s but declined thereafter, in both developed and developing countries. Amidst the series of crises and shocks described above, economic uncertainties increased, which discouraged firms’ investment activities. Global investment growth is projected to grow by only 2 per cent in 2024, only a marginal improvement from the 1.9 per cent estimated for 2023, and significantly below its 2011–2019 average growth rate of 4 per cent. 

Figure II.10
Growth of gross fixed capital formation in the world, developed and developing economies, 2000-2023
(Percentage)
  
Source: UN DESA, based on estimates and forecasts produced with the UN DESA World Economic Forecasting Model.
Notes: Growth rates for 2023 are partially estimated. 

The ultra-loose monetary environment in the aftermath of the 2008 world financial and economic crisis did not successfully boost investment growth. In developed economies, commercial banks were reluctant to fund fragile businesses during uncertain economic times and, instead, kept the additional resources in their reserve accounts at the central banks. In the United States, for instance, excess reserves of depository institutions held in the Federal Reserve surged from $1.6 billion in January 2008 to $2.7 trillion in August 2014.  In developing economies, deceleration of investment growth in the decade leading up to the COVID-19 pandemic reflects the significant drop in commodity prices during 2014-2016 and the associated deterioration of terms of trade, weak growth in advanced economies and high corporate leverage.  Moreover, while loose global financial conditions in the decade after the 2008 world financial and economic crisis encouraged capital inflows, these flows predominantly came through portfolio channels, with no clear effect on investment and growth.  

Productivity growth – largely driven by productive investments – declined considerably in the developing countries in the past two decades. Annual total factor productivity (TFP) growth, a key measure of economic efficiency and productivity, fell from 1.6 per cent during the period 2000–2007 to 0.2 per cent during the period 2011-2019 in the developing economies. In sub-Saharan Africa, annual TFP growth declined by an even larger margin, falling from 2.1 per cent during the period 2000–2007 to -0.2 per cent during the period 2011–2019. A multitude of factors, including constrained investment, inadequate research and development activities, limited technology spillovers, weak institutions, and decelerated international trade growth, have contribute to the decline in TFP growth.

Investment is expected to remain subdued globally. In 2023, residential investment fell significantly in most developed economies amid rising mortgage interest rates and construction costs. The United States saw a particularly severe decline, with residential fixed investment in the first three quarters of 2023 down 14 per cent in comparison with the same period in 2022. In contrast, investment in intellectual property remained robust (see figure II.11). Prospects in most developing countries are also weak, due to softer external demand, volatile commodity prices, high borrowing costs, and fiscal consolidation pressures. High levels of debt amid subdued growth continue to constrain fiscal space, making it harder for Governments to borrow and invest. Conflicts hamper investment in parts of Africa and Western Asia. By contrast, investment in South Asia, particularly in India, remains strong. India is benefiting from growing interest from multinationals, which see the country as an alternative manufacturing base in the context of developed economies’ supply chain diversification strategies. 

Figure II.11
Annual investment growth in selected developed economies, by asset type, 2010-2023H1
(Percentage) 
 
Source: UN DESA, based on data from based on data from CEIC and Eurostat.
Notes: H1 = first half of the year. Figures are in constant prices. Data for the United Kingdom, euro area and Japan are total investment; data for the United States are private investment.

6.	Labour markets
Recent crises have adversely affected global labour markets, with recovery uneven across regions. After reaching a peak of 6.5 per cent in 2009 during the world financial and economic crisis, the global unemployment rate moderated, falling to 5.6 per cent in 2019. In the wake of the COVID-19 pandemic, the unemployment rate increased to 6.6 per cent in 2020, with the number of people unemployed increasing from 194 million to 227 million in just one year.  Young workers and workers with basic education were among the most affected. The post-pandemic recovery has been swift but uneven. Although the global unemployment rate dropped to an estimated 5.1 per cent in 2023, labour market recoveries diverged considerably between developed and developing countries. Key employment indicators in many developing countries have yet to return to pre-pandemic levels. In parts of Western Asia and Africa, for instance, unemployment rates still exceeded 2019 levels. Slowing economic growth in 2024 is expected to further weigh on employment prospects in many regions.

Demographic shifts, economic development patterns, technology advances, as well as multiple crises are reshaping labour markets. Between 2000 and 2023, the world total population increased from 6.1 billion to 8 billion.  While many regions, including Europe, North America and East Asia, face ageing populations, a rapidly growing youth and working-age population challenges policymakers to generate enough productive jobs, particularly in South Asia and sub-Saharan Africa. Historically, countries shifted from low-productivity agriculture to higher-productivity activities in industrial or services sectors during the process of structural transformation. More recently, in many low-income countries, the contribution of agriculture to GDP has declined faster than the share of workers in agriculture, while the manufacturing sector has not absorbed many workers  (see also Chapter III.B and III.G). Labour productivity growth has been on a downward trend across country income groups (figure II.12), which can be partly attributed to weaker investment and – for many developing countries – diminishing productivity gains from allocations of labour towards more productive sectors.  In addition, limited employment opportunities in the formal sector and the absence of unemployment benefits in many developing countries have contributed to widespread informal employment, which is typically associated with poor working conditions, limited access to social protection, and little or no income security.

Figure II.12
Labour productivity growth, by country income group, 2000-2022
(Percentage) 
(a) High-income countries

 	(b) Upper-middle-income countries
 	(c) Lower-middle-income countries
 	(d) Low-income countries

 
Source: UN DESA, based on data from ILO STAT, available at https://www.ilo.org/shinyapps/bulkexplorer40/?lang=en&id=SDG_A821_NOC_RT_A (accessed on 30 December 2023).
Note: A liner trend line is added on each panel.

Rapid technological change could bring further disruptions, while also creating new job opportunities (see also chapter III.G). When firms adopt new methods of production, workers with low-skilled jobs engaged in routine tasks are often put at risk, as these occupations are most susceptible to automation. The launch of ChatGPT in November 2022 marked the beginning of a new era for artificial intelligence (AI), which may accelerate the substitution of some lower- and medium-skilled jobs but complement and augment the work of high-skilled professions.  AI’s asymmetric effects across the skill spectrum could increase income inequality in the labour market. Women could be particularly adversely affected since they are overrepresented in occupations with higher risks of automation, although female-dominated occupations also have more potential to be complemented by technology.  The net effect of AI on labour market inequality will depend on the management of this transition and whether the shift leans more towards automation or augmentation. 
7.	Climate risks and the global economy 
The climate emergency and related extreme weather events have brought considerable economic and social costs, disproportionately affecting the most vulnerable countries and communities. Extreme weather events have occurred more frequently over the past few decades, while their economic and social impact has become increasingly more pronounced. The number of disasters increased from an annual average of around 310 from 2000 to 2020   to over 340 between 2020 and 2023. The year 2023 saw a surge in extreme weather events and the hottest summer since global records were first kept in 1880.   These extreme weather events take a significant human and economic toll: during the period 2000-2023, about 2.6 per cent of the world population lost their lives, were injured, or became homeless due to climate disasters, including 3.2 per cent of the population in low-income countries, compared with 0.5 per cent in high-income countries (figure II.13a). An additional 68 to 135 million people could be pushed into poverty by 2030 because of climate change.  Global annual economic damage from disasters stood at over $173 billion between 2020 and 2023, up from an annual average of $108 billion during the first decade of the century (figure II.13b). 

Small island developing States (SIDS) have been particularly vulnerable. From 2010 to 2019, SIDS lost $94.3 billion due to weather, climate, and water-related hazards - compared to the total SIDS GDP of $874 billion in 2019.  Climate vulnerability is also linked with higher borrowing cost and – when countries are hit by extreme weather events – weaker recovery (see Chapter III.E). Disruption to economic activities and livelihoods and damages to infrastructures affect countries’ ability to mobilize domestic and external resources and elevate creditors’ perception of country risks, which translate into even higher borrowing cost and debt vulnerability. 

While climate change impacts are increasingly macro-relevant, global macro-economic conditions in turn affect countries’ abilities to invest in climate mitigation and adaptation. Many countries have increased investment in renewable energy to reduce carbon emissions; however, these actions are not yet sufficient. In 2023, global investment in renewable power generation reached $658 billion, almost doubling investment of $331 billion in 2015. Developed countries and China accounted for 90 per cent of this increase. China alone was responsible for 41 per cent of global investment in renewable energy in 2023, with the rest of the developing countries accounting for only 16 per cent. Increased investment in renewables does not however indicate a reduction of investment in fossil fuels: investment in fossil fuels rebounded in recent years, surpassing pre-pandemic levels in 2022 and 2023. Global coal production has surged due to its much lower capital intensity compared to oil and gas.  High interest rates and increased capital costs discourage investments in green transitions, as they make financing capital-heavy renewable energy projects costlier, thereby diminishing their appeal relative to more affordable, non-renewable alternatives. This can slow down the shift towards sustainable energy solutions.
 

Figure II.13
Economic and social costs of natural disasters in the world and by country income groups, 2000-2023
(a) Annual average share of people affected by natural disasters 
(Percentage)
 

(b) Annual average economic damage caused by natural disasters 
(Billions of United States dollars)                                 (Percentage)
 
Source: UN DESA calculation based on the International Disaster Database, available at https://www.emdat.be/ (accessed on 24 December 2023).
Note: Natural disasters include drought, extreme temperature, flood, glacial lake outburst flood, storm, and wildfire.
 

8.	Conclusion 
The global economy has become progressively less ‘enabling’ for mobilizing financing and investment for development over the last 25 years. The financing for development outcomes recognized the critical role that an enabling international economic environment plays in achieving development outcomes. The subsequent chapters of this report will show how the major crises in 2008/09 and since 2020 – and the broader deceleration in global growth and investment – have significantly impeded the mobilization of public and private resources. This is mirrored in less dynamic trade and cross-border investment trends, contributing to a less benign economic environment. 

Improving this global enabling environment will be a central challenge in the pursuit of the SDGs and energy transitions. Achieving the SDGs and the large-scale transitions needed to avoid catastrophic climate change will require investments at unprecedented scale. Such an investment push is not conceivable unless countries and the international community as a whole find ways to address key macroeconomic challenges and constraints, which include deteriorating public finances, fiscal constraints and debt overhangs in many developing countries, monetary and financial stability risks that impact the cost of capital, and the dearth of productive and sustainable investment that is crucial for improving longer-term growth and resilience to climate and other adverse shocks. Proposals put forward in the rest of this report aim not only to advance implementation of the respective action areas, but also to form a package of domestic reforms and reforms to the international financial architecture that together could help steer the post-COVID-19 economy towards a path of sustained, sustainable, and inclusive growth. 
