III.B.	Domestic and international private business and finance
1.	Key messages and recommendations 
Private business and finance is an important driver of sustainable growth and development. As noted in the Addis Agenda, ‘private business activity, investment and innovation are major drivers of productivity, inclusive economic growth and job creation.’ To deliver on these promises, business activity and investment (both foreign and domestic), need to be dynamic, inclusive, risk-informed and sustainable. However, private sector dynamism slowed after the 2008/09 crisis, in parallel to the broader macroeconomic growth slow-down, which also led to a widening SDG investment gap. Revitalizing private sector development that is fully aligned with sustainable development will be a core task of the fourth international conference on financing for development. 

Along with a broader slow-down in global growth, foreign direct investment (FDI) flows have decelerated, revealing disparities in both geographical and sectoral distribution. Investment trends have been highly uneven since Member States convened in Monterrey in 2002. Following rapid acceleration in the 1990s and 2000s, the past 15 years have seen a slowdown in foreign investment, driven largely by shifts from capital intensive activities towards digital business models, asset-light forms of production and a servicification of economies. These trends in turn are making ‘traditional’ models of development based on exports of manufactured goods increasingly difficult to pursue. At the same time, the investment gap is continuing to grow across all SDG sectors, reflecting both underinvestment and additional needs, particularly in energy and infrastructure. While investment in these sectors has grown rapidly since 2015, growth has been highly uneven, with much of it concentrated in developed countries and China as well as some large developing countries. Least developed countries have only seen marginal investment growth over the past two decades, and will require dedicated assistance. The Fourth Conference on Financing for Development provides an opportunity to agree on ambitious measures to support LDCs and other developing countries to mobilize long-term financing and investment for the SDGs. This could include efforts to tackle high costs of capital and risk premia, which are thwarting efforts in many developing countries to finance projects across SDG sectors, as well as an Investment Support Center for the LDCs as mandated in the Doha Programme of Action. 

Significant structural changes in the global economy are reshaping private investment and developing countries’ ability to integrate productively in the global economy, necessitating a search for new growth and development strategies. Changes have included the geographical concentration of manufacturing in several large developing countries, technological change, most notably digitalization, and unequal gains from global value chains (GVCs). They have contributed to very uneven growth in manufacturing activities, which have traditionally been a ‘development escalator’, with some regions experiencing ‘premature deindustrialization’. Nonetheless, some economies have leapfrogged certain stages, developing in non-linear ways, influenced by factors like digitization, global economic shifts, and domestic policy and institutional frameworks.

Today, smaller firms and modern service providers can play a more central role in connecting firms with international supply chains and boosting countries’ industrial transformation. However, relying on services as a basis for economic growth can prove challenging for those developing countries (including LDCs) where energy supply, ICT infrastructure, and human capital remain limited. Services also tend to create fewer jobs. As new growth and development strategies – suitable for an age of climate change, rapid technological change, and a changing global economy – are being developed, there has been renewed interest in sustainable industrial policies to support sustainable and inclusive transformations. The fourth international conference on financing for development can help enable the alignment of financing frameworks and actions (across all action areas of the Addis Ababa Action Agenda, at national and international levels) to facilitate such transformations. 
Transformation strategies can build on and must complement growing interest and efforts by the private sector to integrate sustainability considerations. While significant progress has been noted in corporate sustainability over the past thirty years, risks of misalignment with sustainability goals persist. On the one hand, companies have actively engaged in voluntary sustainability initiatives to address risks and capitalize on opportunities tied to emerging macro trends and stakeholder expectations. But on the other hand, short-term oriented decision making, particularly evident in moments of crisis, reveal the ongoing need to redefine the broader “rules of the game” via policy frameworks. This includes shifting focus from minimizing the negative consequences of shocks when risks are realized, to preventing the creation of risks and reducing existing risks before risks manifest as shocks.

A more dynamic and sustainable business sector will only arise with more inclusive and sustainable financial markets. Lack of access to affordable finance and financial incentives misaligned with sustainability are often among the most binding constraints for sustainable private sector development. While important progress was made towards financial inclusion, with more than half a billion people gaining access to financial services between 2017 and 2021 alone, availability of long-term financing continues to be a challenge for SMEs and individuals, particularly in developing countries. Short-term incentives and decision making also often stand in the way of more sustainability – with longer-term investors more inclined to incorporate sustainability risks into their decision making, and to seek companies that prioritize long-term business fundamentals over short-term targets. Extending investors’ time horizons is thus imperative to align their objectives with long-term sustainable development trends; stability, sustainability and greater access are mutually reinforcing. 

After the rapid emergence of sustainable finance over the past 25 years, the current moment offers a chance to accelerate progress. Investor interest in sustainable finance has grown steadily since the 1990s, with a net expansion from 2015. Sustainable fund flows have remained relatively resilient, consistently surpassing 2016 levels since then, despite year-on-year fluctuations following the COVID-19 pandemic. But sustainable fund assets still make up a small percentage of total global assets under management today, estimated at less than five percent of the global fund market in 2023. Furthermore, impact investing, designed to contribute to real-world solutions in line with the SDGs, represents only a small part of sustainable assets. Weaknesses related to the field’s information infrastructure, that have given rise to greenwashing concerns, are compounded by an enabling environment that still incentivizes traditional investment strategies. Growing political polarization of the field has also led to backlash in some countries. Against this challenging backdrop, the field has commenced a journey towards maturation, marked by the refinement and consolidation of voluntary standards and the enactment of legislation at the national and regional levels. The upcoming fourth international conference offers an opportunity to continue collaborating towards (i) the  interoperability of sustainable finance legislation across regions to prevent uneven progress and heavy compliance burdens, while accounting for regional and local specificities; (ii) the adoption of mandatory national disclosure standards with a double materiality vision; (iii) frameworks and carefully-crafted incentives for impact investing at scale to align capital markets with real world impact; (iv) a broader set of macro-economic policies that create enabling conditions for sustainable transformations.

This chapter will give a brief overview of investment trends in the past two decades, including investment trends in sustainable transformations. It will then discuss developments in aligning business activity with sustainable development, including efforts to strengthen the business environment and private sector development in a changing global economy. Lastly, the chapter discusses trends and progress in achieving a financial sector that is both inclusive and sustainable.

2.	Investment trends in an evolving global economy: The long view
2.1.	Foreign direct investment trends since Monterrey

Since Member States convened in Monterrey in 2002, global foreign investment patterns have changed dramatically, with the global financial crisis in 2008/09 proving to be an inflection point. In the context of massive changes in the global division of labor and rapid technological change, including the shift towards digital business models and asset-light forms of production, increased geopolitical fragmentation and accelerating climate change, FDI trends have shifted over the past decades, evolving in terms of volume, direction and sectoral breakdown. A number of crises, including the 2008/09 financial crisis and the COVID-19 pandemic, have proved to be inflection points, accelerating trends driven by structural rather than transitory factors. Amidst changing investment patterns, growing efforts to align foreign investment trends with sustainable development have thus far fallen short of what is needed to achieve the 2030 Agenda. Changing FDI patterns have also cast doubts on the viability of ‘traditional’ models of economic development based on attracting FDI and exports of manufactured goods. 

The first international conference on financing for development in Monterrey took place against the backdrop of a decade of FDI expansion – a trend that has since slowed and, more recently, stalled. Enabled by an acceleration of technological progress and fueled by the quest for low labor costs and increased productivity, the 1990s and early 2000s saw a rapid growth in global FDI stocks, along with a rapid expansion of global trade (see Figure 1). This trend slowed markedly following the global financial crisis of 2008/09. FDI growth slowed dramatically compared to average growth rates in the 2000s, growing only 0.8 per cent on average in the 2010s along with decelerating trade growth and a stagnation in global value chains (GVCs). The shift towards digital business models and ‘asset-light’ forms of production, a rise in protectionism and policy uncertainty as well as the COVID-19 pandemic have contributed to this slowdown. Most recently, 2023 global FDI marginally increased to 1.37 trillion US, following a decline in 2022.

Figure 1: Trends in FDI, trade, GDP and GVC 
 
Source: UNCTAD
The growth and integration of developing countries into the global economy was a major driver of FDI trends. Against the backdrop of a changing global economic landscape outlined in chapter I, developing countries have accounted for increasing shares in both inward and outward FDI. As shown in Figure 2a, in 2018, developing countries eclipsed developed countries for the first time as a destination of FDI flows, gradually doubling their share from around one third to two thirds of global FDI. While developing countries as a group have increased their share, including due to the rise of China as major recipient of inward FDI, LDCs continue to trail behind. Over the past years, LDCs only saw 0.5 percentage points higher FDI inflows than over a comparable timeframe between 2002 to 2004. Developing countries have also increased their share of outward FDI, which rose significantly from 7 per cent in 2002 to around one third of all FDI (31 per cent) in 2022. As shown in Figure 2b, China has played an increasingly important role as source country of FDI since the mid-2000s. 

Figure 2a and 2b
Share of global inward and outward FDI

Source: Data from UNCTAD

In addition to changes in volume and direction, FDI flows have also seen a transformation in composition. FDI flows into service sectors have expanded significantly, fueled by an increased internationalization of services and a servicification of manufacturing. These trends, together with accelerating digitalization, have contributed to a slowdown of cross-border investment in physical assets, as international investment has been increasingly directed towards more intangible and ‘asset-light’ modes of production. Accordingly, greenfield investment in manufacturing has dropped by up to a quarter, making it harder for countries to pursue export-based development models contingent upon inward greenfield FDI for capital formation. In addition, as Figure 3 suggests, the share of developing countries in global greenfield investment by value has declined below its long-run average of around 56 per cent and below the respective share of developed countries. 


Figure 3
Developing countries’ and LDCs’ share of global greenfield investment 
3-year moving average

Source: Data from UNCTAD

2.2.	Investments trends in sustainable transformations

Have investment trends facilitated sustainable transformations for the 2030 Agenda? Despite some progress, the answer thus far is no(t yet). A review of investment needs suggests that the investment gap across all SDG sectors has increased from $2.5 trillion in 2015 to more than $4 trillion per year today, due to both underinvestment and additional needs (see also Chapter I). Investment needs continue to be particularly large in the area of energy and infrastructure (see Figure 4). While international investment in the renewable energy sector has nearly tripled since the adoption of the SDGs and the Paris Agreement, this growth has been unbalanced, with much of it concentrated in developed countries and China. Installed capacity and new investments still fall far short of what is needed to meet the Paris goals, with an additional 578 GW of installed capacity in emerging renewable technologies required by 2030, and gaps largest in Africa and the Middle East, where capacity needs to grow more than tenfold by 2030, requiring cumulative investment of $1.36 trillion (see Figure 5). 


Figure 4
Estimated annual investment gap (public and private) in key SDG sectors
trillions of dollars

Source: UNCTAD
Figure 5
Renewable energy: global total installed capacity and investment needs

Source: UNCTAD

Achieving energy transitions for sustainable development requires significantly scaled-up investment in a number of sectors, but high costs of capital in developing countries remain a significant obstacle. A number of factors have hampered sufficient investment in necessary infrastructure, the entire renewable energy value chain, alternative technologies, and in energy efficiency. FDI flows have largely been directed towards renewable energy generation, but much less so to related critical industries or to those developing countries where investment needs are greatest. Project financing continues to be hampered by high costs of capital in developing countries, costs that are driven more by macroeconomic risk perceptions than by project risk. Indeed, the cost of capital for comparable projects are significantly higher in developing countries than in developed countries; perceived macro-economic risks play a much larger role in explaining risk premia than project-specific/micro risks (see Table 1). Such high cost of capital is a significant impediment to investment in both renewable infrastructures and other necessary long-term investments in the SDGs. Overall, the high cost of capital, particularly in countries in debt distress or with high risk ratings, is a strong disincentive for investors to shift towards renewable energy assets. 
Table 1
Comparative Project risks and weighted cost of capital for developed and selected developing countries
Country category
Weighted cost of capital
Government cost of borrowing
Project risk
Developed countries
4.0%
-0.3%
4.3%
Industrializing  developing countries
10.6%
7.7%
2.9%
Source: Persaud (2023), data from IEA and Bloomberg

As investment into manufacturing capacity is stagnating and investment trends are aligning with asset-light and digital business models, new investment strategies and development pathways need to be found. This could include investment promotion and facilitating strategies aimed at attracting investment in areas such as digital infrastructures and innovation, as well as infrastructures that can act as enabling environments for thriving service sectors. This is likely to prove particularly challenging for LDCs, which will require significant support . It also highlights the role of international development cooperation (see chapter III.C) and of MDBs in facilitating and investing in this shift towards new development pathways (see Box III.B.1 for the World Bank’s Private Sector Investment Lab). 

Box III.B.1
Private Sector Investment Lab (PSIL)

The Private Sector Investment Lab is a group of 15 CEOs of leading global institutions who have agreed to provide their insights, expertise and experience to help the World Bank Group scale up mobilization of private capital for financing climate and other development priorities in emerging economies. The Lab has identified five areas as critical to private capital mobilization on which its work is currently focused. These are:  guarantees; foreign exchange (FX) risk solutions; scaling capital markets and securitization solutions to distribute assets; country level approaches to improve enabling environments and support bankable project pipelines; and mobilizing early-stage capital for high impact projects.  The aim is to turn the Lab’s ideas into action through development of new instruments of intervention and delivery mechanisms, some of which will be tested through pilot projects and will continue to work towards developing and scaling new and existing innovative solutions for private capital mobilization in partnership with all relevant stakeholders. The Lab is already discussing specific projects that can serve as pilots for testing and if successful, scaling up, new solutions being developed pursuant to Lab recommendations.

Source: World Bank

3.	Aligning business with sustainable development
3.1.	Private sector development in a changing global economy

Private sector development is at the heart of sustainable growth and development; yet private sector dynamism slowed after the 2008/09 crisis, in parallel to the broader macroeconomic growth slow-down and the slow-down in FDI discussed above. As noted in the Addis Agenda, ‘private business activity, investment and innovation are major drivers of productivity, inclusive economic growth and job creation.’ The private sector contributes 84 per cent to GDP and 90 per cent to job creation in developing countries. It is private sector development that creates technological and organizational capabilities at scale, the resource base for revenue mobilization, and the vast majority of decent jobs in most countries. Yet, private sector dynamism slowed after the 2008 global economic and financial crisis. Private investment grew at very high rates during the first decade of this century, particularly in developing regions such as Africa and East Asia and Pacific. Many economies witnessed a contraction in private investment in 2009 and only a modest subsequent recovery, with growth rates substantially below pre-2008 levels. High income countries were the exception to this trend, with private investment growing at a faster rate after the 2008 global economic and financial crisis (Figure 6). The recent Covid-19 crisis has further slowed – if not reversed – gains from private sector development in many developing countries and LDCs. 

Figure 6
Private investment growth slowed in most regions during the 2010s
(Percent change)

Source: IMF Investment and Capital Stock Dataset.
Note: Data refers to 162 economies between 2000 and 2019. Private investment is defined as private gross fixed capital formation in constant 2017 dollars.

Private sector development has traditionally been associated with industrialization and diversification, which in turn facilitated sustained economic development and improvements in living standards. Such structural transformations involve the reallocation of capital and human resources from low- to high-productivity activities and sectors through economic diversification and strengthening productive linkages in the economy (see 2023 FSDR). Historically, a thriving manufacturing sector has often been at the heart of such transformations, because of several unique properties: technological advances often originate in the sector, and developing countries were able to import these and achieve rapid productivity growth even when broader institutional capabilities and skills were still comparatively scarce; many low-skilled workers found employment in manufacturing; and its products are tradeable, and hence growth not limited by the small size of domestic markets in many developing countries. Overall, more diversified economies tend to have higher per capita incomes and better long-term growth prospects, are less volatile and do better on poverty reduction. Since 2000, less diversified economies – usually commodity exporting developing countries – tended to experience higher volatility and were less likely to experience stable growth rates (see chapter III.D).

Manufacturing has become less effective as a ‘development escalator’. At the current pace of progress, the world will not achieve SDG 9 and its industry-related targets. Developing countries face significant challenges, notably African LDCs, which have seen manufacturing value-added mostly stagnate as a share of GDP over the last 20 years (see Figure 7). This phenomenon has been described as ‘premature de-industrialization’: as economies grow and per capita income rises, the share of labour employed in manufacturing tends to first rise and then fall. Since the 1980s, this turning point has arrived at increasingly lower levels of per capita income, with workers moving from agriculture to services such as trade and hospitality rather than manufacturing or modern services. Productivity growth has declined, with working conditions often characterized by widespread informality in countries where this premature deindustrialization is taking place, particularly in Africa and Latin America. Where jobs are being created, it is usually by small, less productive, and often informal manufacturing companies. And where natural resource exports or capital inflows provide external fuel to growth, growth dynamics tend to be fragile and exposed to global market shocks. Several factors are responsible:

•	The geographic concentration of manufacturing activities in a few large economies and regions. This trend results from the streamlining of supply chains and the search for price competitiveness by producers. For example, China has emerged as the preeminent global manufacturing hub, producing 28.7 per cent of global manufacturing output in 2019, up from only 8 per cent of the global total in 2004. 
•	Productivity-enhancing technological change, primarily in advanced economies. While the emergence and diffusion of advanced digital production technologies is creating new opportunities for developing countries, they have also “raised the bar” for these same countries to develop a modern manufacturing sector and may limit employment creation opportunities, particularly considering the lack of affordability of some advanced technologies. New technologies facilitate small-scale manufacturing, and additive manufacturing allows firms to cut down on production, by reducing the cost of customization. It enables creative firms to compete thanks to their knowledge of local needs. New business models based on the collaborative economy allow small firms to take advantage of under-utilized resources reaching scale, become more competitive, and improve the efficiency of environmental resource use. New communication technologies can also help firms participate in global trade. Companies can reach markets beyond their geographical location with an online presence. Yet, there is a need to better understand and manage the risks associated with rapid technological change. Technological changes and digitalization can decrease the demand for low-cost labour in manufacturing and increase the need for skills. As a result, it may reduce the incentive for multinational companies to offshore production to countries with low-cost labour.
•	The rise in global value chains (GVCs), which has created opportunities for firms in developing countries, but with very unequal distribution of gains. Between 2002 and 2022, global trade in intermediate goods (proxy for GVC trade) more than tripled, with Asia and Europe accounting for 40 and 34 per cent of GVC trade, respectively, even when their expansion slowed more recently (see Chapter III.D). Elsewhere, firms have found it more challenging to integrate into GVCs. Lead firms have seen rising mark-ups and profits, suggesting that a growing share of cost reductions from GVC participation are not being passed on. Large firms in developing countries have adopted more capital-intensive technologies, similar to their peers in advanced markets. At the same time, markups for producers in developing countries are declining and gains from GVC participation can be lost if a country’s private sector is unable to continue upgrading its activities. Countries can industrialize through GVCs thanks to the possibility of specializing in certain tasks. However, investing in the wrong combination of skills and production patterns could limit the opportunity to upgrade, innovate, and break into more sophisticated value chains – effectively trapping firms in  stagnating segments and low value-added activities and “hollowing out” the domestic manufacturing sector. It is also crucial to identify and address vulnerabilities in global value chains, especially more sophisticated ones, as this increases the potential for risk exposure. Making production decisions based on risk assessment can also facilitate moving away from a cost-based competition, safeguard against disruptions and promote more sustainable and resilient industries.

Figure 7
Manufacturing has not grown homogeneously across developing countries and LDCs

Source: FSDR 2023.

Today, modern services can play a more central role in connecting firms with international supply chains and boosting countries’ industrial transformation. Together with digital technologies, international supply chains rely on four services sectors — financial services, information and communication technologies (ICT), transport and logistics, and business and professional services —for their functioning. These service sectors have also become major sources of employment creation, exports, foreign direct investment (FDI), and innovation. Through linkages to other sectors, their presence also enhances the competitiveness of firms in other sectors. For example, in regions with high-quality connected services, 44 per cent of all companies are engaged in export, compared with 19 per cent of firms where such services are weaker. The services sector can allow firms to tap into value chains for manufacturing products that would be otherwise beyond their capability. Modern communications technology and the fall in transport costs have created opportunities for developing countries to export ancillary services such as back-office processing (e.g., customer care or data handling). However, relying on services can prove challenging for those developing countries (including LDCs) where energy supply, ICT infrastructure, and human capital remain limited. In this case, policy makers can play a large role in helping their countries and firms become competitive in high-productivity manufacturing-related services (see section 3.2 and chapter III.B of FSDR 2023). 

Private sector development, decent jobs and gender equality

Private firms account for the vast majority of employment creation in most countries; in a challenging global context the creation of sufficient and decent jobs remains a major challenge in many developing countries. Global employment growth has slowed down significantly since the 2008 crisis, and along with the broader deceleration of growth, trade, and investment. While employment growth averaged 0.9 per cent per year on average between 2000 and 2008, it fell to only 0.1 per cent annually since then. Countries that successfully transformed their economies, such as Bangladesh, China, and Thailand, also created good jobs on a large scale. For example, between 2003 and 2016, Bangladesh experienced an almost 10 percentage point shift in the share of employment towards manufacturing and services. Waged jobs grew by almost 6 per cent annually, almost three times faster than the rise in workforce. Moreover, 70 per cent of all new jobs created went to women. As manufacturing-based and labour-intensive transformations become more challenging (see above), closing the “decent jobs” gap is emerging as a major challenge (see Figure 8).

Figure 8
Annual jobs needed and quality jobs created
(millions)

Source: International Development Association, IDA 19 Special Theme: Jobs and Economic Transformation.

The quality of employment also remains a critical challenge. High levels of informality are still prevalent in many developing countries result in gaps in social protection coverage and limit revenue mobilization, holding back socio-economic development. This includes negative effects of informality on labour productivity and human capital accumulation. Fifty-eight per cent of jobs globally, or around 2 billion people, remain in the informal sector, mostly but not exclusively in developing countries. Around 90 per cent of total employment in LDCs and low-income countries can be considered informal, compared to 67 per cent in middle-income countries and 18 per cent in advanced economies. A great majority of workers in the informal economy and their families do not have access to adequate healthcare and income security, and as a result are particularly vulnerable to economic shocks. Most workers in the informal economy are not affiliated with contributory schemes, nor are they reached by narrowly targeted “safety nets”, as they are not considered “poor enough” to qualify for these. Many countries have introduced forms of mandatory coverage, while others have opened social insurance to informal economy workers and micro-entrepreneurs with mixed results.


Figure 9
Informality remains prevalent and affects the ability to provide public services, 2000-2018
Panel A. Informal activity (% of GDP) and self-employment rates (% of employment)
Panel B. Government revenues and expenditure for high and low informality countries



Note: Data span 2000-2018. In Panel B, high and low informality countries are the highest and lowest one-third by informal output, respectively, out of 69 non-energy exporting EMDEs with over 3.5 million in population. 
Source: World Bank, The Long Shadow of Informality.

High levels of informality and a dearth of decent jobs is related to younger and smaller firms accounting for a large proportion of economic activity and job creation in many developing countries. Many jobs created by young, small, or informal firms are in low productivity sectors, with unequal employment opportunities, lower wages, and limited access to social protection. In 2019, more than 630 million workers worldwide (19 per cent of all those employed) did not earn enough to lift themselves and their families out of poverty. Moreover, and in the event of shocks and crises, economies relying on smaller firms tend to take a bigger hit, as Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises (MSMEs) tend to have fewer assets and limited cash reserves to cushion against slowing demand and liquidity shortages. An example of this are SMEs in the agrifood sector, which are often scattered, small to very small, informal, family-based and lack economies of scale – jobs here also tend to be highly insecure. In the case of the crisis following Covid-19, MSMEs were severely impacted, particularly in developing countries, facing higher risk of permanent closure. In August 2020, 22 per cent of MSMEs surveyed reported that they risked shutting down permanently within three months, compared to 9 per cent for large firms; with this percentage rising to 34 per cent for companies operating in LDCs. And while SMEs can occupy niches of digital success, it is large firms that are typically associated with frontier innovation. These companies can usually afford higher levels of R&D expenditure, have more experience and can more easily form partnerships or prompt government intervention.

Gender inequality remains pervasive and persistent in the labour market. Gender inequality in employment access has remained a major challenge, and has not improved since 2005. Worldwide, women’s labour force participation rate stands at 47 per cent, compared to 73 per cent for men. The gender gap remains a major concern across all regions, ranging from 11 percentage points in Europe to 30 percentage points in Asia. Improved educational attainment among women has done little to shift deeply entrenched occupational segregation in both developed and developing countries. As a result, the global gender pay gap persists with women earning 51 cents to every dollar earned by men. Part of this is attributable to the time women dedicate to unpaid care and domestic work, which was 3.3 times more than men in 2014 and has decreased to 2.6 times more in 2023. The smallest jobs gaps are found in high-income countries, with men registering a rate of 7.4 per cent and women 9.6 per cent. However, as national income decreases, the jobs gap between women and men increases, reaching 24.9 and 17.4 per cent in low-income and lower-middle-income groups, respectively. This points to persistent and structural problems worldwide. Women face challenges in more competitive and open sectors too: Firms integrated in GVCs may offer more women jobs, but they seem to have even lower glass ceilings. Women are generally found in the lower value-added segments, and it is hard to find women owners and managers. The share of women in informal employment exceeds that of men in 56 per cent of countries, especially in low- and lower-middle-income countries.

Figure 10
Unemployment and jobs gap rate by gender, 2005-2022
(Percentage rate)

Note: The jobs gap rate measures the share of persons who would like to work but do not have a job.
Source: Gomis et al., “New Data Shine Light on Gender Gaps in the Labour Market.”	 
3.2.	Aligning business models with sustainable development

In the past thirty years, businesses have increasingly factored in sustainability considerations driven by the recognition of their long-term benefits, but risks of misalignment or backtracking underscore the need to redefine the “rules of the game”. In efforts to try to fill remaining gaps (e.g., see aforementioned gender disparities), companies are routinely integrating sustainability issues in their decision-making today. Yet, despite much greater awareness of ESG (environment, social and governance) factors, many business activities and investments remain misaligned with sustainable development due to short-term incentives and the absence of an enabling environment for long-term decision-making. To fully align business models with sustainable development will require redefining the rules of the game, including through legislation or regulations, coupled with incentivizing financial markets to be a catalyst for change (see section 4.2). 
A longstanding relationship between business and society 

Modern interpretations of corporate responsibilities to society evolved with globalization and the internationalization of sustainable development. The first notions of business contribution to society have been traced back to as early as Ancient Mesopotamia and Ancient Rome. Modern interpretations of what has been termed Corporate Social Responsibility (CSR) arose in the 1950s. They broadened with the rise of an international approach to sustainable development; in 1999, the concept of Triple Bottom Line provided a sustainability framework that aims to balance a company’s social, environmental and economic impact. In the same year, UN Secretary-General Kofi Annan proposed what became the UN Global Compact in Davos. Twenty years later, the Business Roundtable codified the new purpose of corporations as stakeholder capitalism, going beyond solely serving shareholders.

Driven by globalization and other systemically significant trends, alongside stakeholder pressures, companies have increasingly acknowledged the importance of addressing sustainability risks and opportunities. Globalization expanded the reach of multinational corporations into diverse business environments, often with weak regulatory frameworks, introducing new reputational, legal and operational risks. In response, companies adopted voluntary internal sustainability policies to ensure uniform management across territories (e.g., transparent supply chains to avoid human rights risks). Moreover, the emergence of new systemic risks (e.g., climate change), and environmental, social, or economic crises (e.g., the 1989 Exxon Valdez Oil spill, the 2008 world financial and economic crisis, COVID-19) contributed to reshaping of perceptions of the role of business in society and companies’ own risk assessments. Evolving stakeholder expectations further influenced companies’ cost/benefit analyses on the integration of sustainability issues. These include investors' pursuit of more sustainable investment options and the update of their policy frameworks (see section 4.2), consumers’ growing preferences for ethical products, a modern workforce leaning towards purpose-driven employers, and policymakers’ heightened regulatory focus on corporate duties. Regulation, at the international level at first, and more recently also at the national level, has focused on both corporate operations and supply chains, with prominent examples on the latter including the US Dodd‐Frank Act (which regulates conflict minerals) in 2010, the UK Modern Slavery Act in 2015 (which includes a transparency in supply chains clause) France's Duty of Vigilance law adopted in 2017, Germany's new Supply Chain Due Diligence Act in 2021, and more recently a proposal at the EU level for a Corporate Sustainability Due Diligence (CSDD) Directive (not yet adopted at the time of writing).
Sustainability integration in modern corporate practices

Many companies have taken voluntary action on sustainability, independent of legislative requirements. CEOs are broadening their roles, with 91 per cent acknowledging a duty to protect local communities and 70 per cent recognizing the need to address public concerns. Companies’ sustainability impacts can stem both from (i) their products, services and activities, and (ii) their operational practices. Initially, business' approach to sustainability was primarily centered around the latter, via the risk-oriented consideration of externalities. This vision gradually expanded, with the realization of the importance of aligning core business activities for real value creation (see for example the recent discourse around the B Corporation, or the "regenerative company," that not only avoid externalities, but also actively contribute to solutions). Businesses have embraced voluntary commitments, such as pledges and standards, to standardize their approaches in line with peers, and to adopt a common language for communicating alignment to shareholders and stakeholders. Bottom-up initiatives also emerged to help companies align with international agreements (see for example the Science Based Targets Initiative helping companies align with the goals of the Paris Agreement), as well as to respond to increasing ESG demands from investors (see section 4.2).
Remaining barriers 

Despite rising commitments, SDG-aligned companies remain in the minority. In 2020, 62 per cent of MSCI SDG Alignment dataset companies (over 8,500 companies) displayed neutral or misalignment across the SDGs for their products, services, and activities. Beyond business models’ misalignment, business practices also remain deficient from a sustainability perspective. Mirroring aforementioned challenges in the global labour market, gender equality has not yet been reached in corporate leadership. Despite the growing number of exchanges that promote gender equality, the number of women in high-level positions within companies remains low in many markets. Women were only holding 23% of the board seats of the top listed companies on 22 major G20 stock exchanges in 2022. Disclosure is another telling example of corporate practices’ misalignment with sustainable development. While 98 per cent of S&P 500 companies engaged in corporate sustainability disclosure in 2022 - up from only 20 per cent in 2011- quality of data remains weak and greenwashing risks abound (see section 4.2). 

Reversals and short-term oriented decisions in moments of crises reveal the limitations of voluntary and bottom-up approaches. A recent survey identified ESG as the primary investment focus for CFOs, but also indicated that this area is most likely to face near-term budget cuts. While sustainability investments or programs enable companies to mitigate long-term risks, crises shorten time horizons and reveal an enduring misalignment between long-term non-financial considerations and prevailing incentives in markets, exacerbated by the mispricing of externalities. This is particularly evident today, due to the current environment characterized by high inflation, high interest rates and geopolitical divides. For example, the surge in oil prices following the COVID-19 pandemic led to renewed interest in brown investments along the fossil fuel value chain. This underlines the need to change incentives and alter the “rules of the game” through policies. 
3.3.	Strengthening the business environment

Changing business practices must be a central element of sustainable transformations, yet the private sector will not be able to systemically change behaviour if profitability and sustainability are not aligned. The rules of the game (i.e., the environment in which companies evolve) must change to enable sustainable practices. Policymakers have various tools at their disposal to align sustainability and profitability. That includes pricing externalities (e.g., through carbon pricing mechanisms), phasing out harmful subsidies, prohibiting activities with negative impacts (such as single use plastics), or mandating certain corporate practices such as sustainability reporting (see section 4.2). It also includes the promotion of business models and opportunities with a positive impact on sustainable development, e.g., through subsidies, as well as public investments and other efforts, through fiscal tools, regulations and laws, to overcome coordination challenges that abound in economy-wide transformations (e.g., in the decarbonization of the transport sector).

Efforts to create an enabling environment for the private sector and provision of relevant public goods should thus be aligned with sustainable development objectives. The rule of law, the absence of corruption and the quality of institutions are important determinants of private sector growth prospects. Investments in public infrastructure as well as in education and health, stable and growth-oriented macro-policies and exchange rates, and regulatory frameworks (including competition policies) all contribute to reducing uncertainty and risks for firms, and thus to a better business environment and a lower cost of borrowing. But to achieve sustainable transformations, even these ‘horizontal’ policies should be informed by broader sustainable development objectives. This includes sequencing and prioritization of public investments, where governments are ‘doomed to choose’, particularly in an environment of tight fiscal constraints; setting ‘right’ incentives through fiscal and tax policies; ensuring that regulatory frameworks reflect appropriate labour, environmental and health standards; and aligning investment and trade facilitation policies with sustainability. For example, policymakers can use land-use procedures and building codes to ensure that infrastructure is not constructed in disaster-prone areas and meets appropriate design and construction standards.

Ensuring that gender equality is enshrined in law and implemented effectively is another key aspect. Currently, laws in 93 economies do not mandate equal pay between men and women for work of equal value. Women’s property rights are still restricted in 76 countries, and women cannot run a business the same way as men in 101 countries. As a result, women are less likely to become entrepreneurs, with 68 women entrepreneurs for every 100 men entrepreneurs active globally.

Easing financial constraints for firms, particularly for long-term investments, requires addressing multiple financial sector bottlenecks. The latest data for SDG indicator 9.3.2 (“Proportion of small-scale industries with a loan or line of credit”) show that nearly one third of small manufacturing firms has a loan or line of credit. Yet, access to credit remains uneven across countries and regions. For example, only 15.7 per cent of firms in sub-Saharan African countries and 17 per cent in LDCs have access to financial services, well below the global average and far from rates in Latin America and the Caribbean and Oceania (44.2 per cent and 45 per cent, respectively). For these SMEs in manufacturing and services activities, policy makers will have to develop and implement programmes to make formal lines of credit more accessible, increase financial literacy among entrepreneurs, and introduce targeted lending in underserved areas. Constraints are most prevalent for long-term financing. Accessing financing on such terms can be a particular challenge, with lenders reluctant to provide long-term credit to borrowers about whom they have very limited information (e.g., SMEs) or for activities on which they are uncertain about future returns (e.g., investments in innovation; see section 4 of this chapter and Box II.8 of FSDR 2023). Public development banks are well placed to fill such gaps (see Chapter III.A). 
A new generation of sustainable industrial policies

In response to the need for sustainable transformations, industrial policies have once again become more prevalent. Unlike policies aimed at improving the broader enabling environment for private business and investment, industrial policies and strategies are targeted in nature. They typically connect policy making with long-term visions and development priorities, help overcome information and coordination problems, and can reduce uncertainty that necessarily accompanies investments in new sectors, activities, and technologies. Industrial policies have been resurgent since the 2008 world financial and economic crisis, with the revival driven by several factors: the decline of decent jobs tied to the decline in manufacturing sectors in some countries; vulnerabilities in supply chains revealed by the COVID-19 pandemic and inflation driven by other supply shocks; rising geopolitical tensions that have created an additional geostrategic impetus to “avoiding external dependencies”, particularly in sectors that are deemed strategically important, such as semiconductors, other high-tech sectors and energy; and finally the need to accelerate the development and deployment of low-carbon technologies and the energy transition, which has led many countries to adopt “green industrial policies”. Industrial policy measures more than doubled between 2009 and 2019, with the revival particularly pronounced in developed countries: four out of the five countries with the largest number of industrial policies are developed countries.

This new generation of industrial policies has to respond to a changing and challenging global environment. Developing countries must harness new opportunities and challenges, in the context of stagnating trade and investment growth and a slow-down in global value chains (GVCs), geographic concentration of manufacturing activities in a few large countries, rapid technological change and digitalization, and under global rules that have made industrial transformation more challenging in recent decades. The objective of such sustainable and inclusive industrial policies is also broader, and more ambitious – it is not only to spur sustained economic growth and build capabilities in the domestic private sector to innovate and enhance productivity, but also to “shape” growth, ensuring that it creates decent jobs and provides opportunities for all, is environmentally sustainable, and is aligned with the SDGs more broadly. Chapter II of the 2023 Financing for Sustainable Development Report laid out a set of recommendations for such a strategic approach.
4.	Aligning finance with sustainable development
A more dynamic, inclusive and sustainable business sector will only arise if there is also a financial sector that is both inclusive and sustainable. Lack of access to finance, excessive costs of finance, and other financial constraints are often among the most binding constraints for private sector development. Access to financial services also remains a concern for households and individuals, particularly in LDCs, despite the significant progress achieved in this area. There has also been an enormous increase in interest in ‘sustainable finance’ – the alignment of the financial sector with sustainability.

4.1.	Inclusive finance 

Over the past two decades, there has been significant progress in financial inclusion for businesses and individuals alike, driven in particular by innovations in digital finance and fin-tech. Yet, despite the progress, significant challenges remain, particularly with regards to access to long-term finance, highlighting the sustained need for financial sector development. Moreover, gender, age and geographical location continue to be critical factors in determining access to financial resources. At the same time, the financing gap between MSMEs and large companies is widening, as MSMEs are facing greater difficulties to navigate the post-COVID economic landscape as well as adapt to the shift from a low to a high interest rate environment. MSMEs from developing countries and those in the informal economy lack the capacity to navigate and hedge against various forms of risks, including exchange rate risks. These challenges need to be urgently addressed to ensure that both MSMEs and individuals have access to affordable, quality financial services. Financing costs have increased globally following a tightening of monetary policy. There has also been an increase in inflationary pressures, which have raised living expenses and have impacted firms with lower elasticity in pricing of products.
Access to finance for firms

Developing domestic financial sectors that are aligned with the SDGs and provide long-term financing for sustainable development in developing countries continues to be a key challenge. Well-developed local financial markets can facilitate risk-sharing and improve the availability of long-term finance beyond a small number of large firms that can tap global financial markets. Despite efforts to promote long-term finance in domestic markets and an increase in bank lending to the private sector over the past 20 years, financial and capital markets remain underdeveloped in terms of size, liquidity and maturity in many developing countries, and long-term credit continues to be scarce (see Figure 11). In order to avoid maturity mismatches, banks require longer-term funding options in order to provide long term lending. Studies have shown, that despite improvements in financial depth, characterized by higher lending from banks to the private sector, developing countries generally see smaller increases in long-term finance.   The recent tightening of global financial conditions has also made long-term finance scarcer in both developed and developing countries.

Domestic efforts to extend maturity structures towards longer term finance have been hampered by a number of factors, including market inefficiencies, an absence of local currency financing, and institutional gaps as well as macroeconomic volatility. Despite progress in promoting domestic capital markets, these markets have stagnated in many developing countries, not (yet) reaching sufficient scale to provide sufficient amounts of long-term finance. Policies that can support the development of capital markets, include strengthening institutional and legal frameworks as well as fostering financial infrastructure. At the same time, building local capital markets is an inherently gradual process that depends on the local needs and context, including the country’s size.


Figure 11
Financial Development Index

Source: IMF data, Note: This chart uses IMF country classifications

Long-term credit in developing countries also continues to be highly skewed towards a small number of very large firms. Faced with significant hurdles to accessing long-term finance, smaller firms are reliant on short-term loans and exposed to roll-over risks that may preclude them from investing in long-term projects. Unlocking greater long-term investment in the SDGs will require financial sector development - through policies that promote macroeconomic stability, strengthen regulation and supervision of banking systems as well as facilitate the long-term development of capital markets and institutional investors. There is also a crucial role for public development banks to play in this regard, which have a unique ability to extend longer-term financing due to their policy mandates and funding structures (see Chapter III.A for national development banks, and chapter III.C for multilateral development banks). 

Access to finance continues to be a critical challenge for SMEs in particular. In response to tightening financial conditions and the unwinding of COVID support measures, the outstanding value of commercial bank loans extended to SMEs relative to GDP has declined. Seventy-five per cent of economies saw a drop in lending to SMEs in 2022. In addition, there continues to be a gender gap in SME financing access with women-owned businesses facing a disproportionate gap in funding. Informality continues to be a key factor determining access to finance and vice versa. Given this interplay between informality and access to finance, policy action is needed that recognize that formalization and financial access need to be advanced in tandem. 
Access to finance for individuals and remittances

Enhancing access to finance for all individuals, including women, and others, has been an FfD priority from the outset: it featured prominently in the Monterrey Consensus and subsequent FfD outcomes, recognizing the contributions that greater financial inclusion can make to business development, social protection, enhancing household and business resilience, and lowering the costs of remittances, among other issues. These commitments have translated into progress on the ground. In the last ten years, account ownership has increased worldwide from 51 per cent in 2011 to 76 per cent in 2021. In developing countries, account ownership grew by 30 percentage points over this period, reaching 71 per cent in 2021; 567 million adults gained access between 2017 and 2021 alone.

Despite progress, significant gaps remain in access and in affordability of financial services, not least for women. The global gender gap in account ownership has narrowed over the last decade, from 8 to 4 percentage points, but it remains significant: in 2021, 78 per cent of men and 74 per cent of women have access to financial services. In developing countries, the gap is slightly broader still (see Figure 12). Women continue to face multiple barriers, such as cost and affordability of financial services and financial literacy. Studies have also highlighted the issue of women’s indebtedness, suggesting that a larger proportion of women than men may use credit to pay for health and education expenses, highlighting the need to consider how policy actions, including reductions in spending on public services, affect women’s spending needs. There also needs to be a greater effort to advance asset ownership incentives for women in order to enable women to pledge collateral to access financing. 

Overall, 1.4 billion adults remain unbanked globally. With account ownership nearly universal in developed countries, virtually all unbanked adults live in the developing world, with gaps largest in the least developed countries, where more than half of all adults remain unbanked. Vulnerable adults, such as the poorest, women, the unemployed and the elderly continue to be those more likely to be unbanked. 

Cost reductions in financial services also fall short of commitments. Migrant remittances and diaspora investment are important sources of income for households and SMEs. Remittances to low- and middle-income countries are expected to reach $669 billion in 2023. However, remittances continue to be more expensive than the commitment made in the Addis and 2030 Agendas, which had set a 3 per cent target for 2030. Global average costs of sending $200 fell slightly, from 7.7 in the second quarter of 2015 to 6.2 percent in the second quarter of 2023, but continue to be more than twice as high as the SDG target. 

Figure 12
Percentage of adults with a bank account by country grouping

Source: Global Findex Database 2021 and UNDESA Staff calculations
Technological innovations have been a major driver for advancing financial inclusion. Mobile money has facilitated a vast expansion of low-cost and small-scale transactions. Between 2021 and 2022 alone, the number of mobile money transactions per 1,000 adults increased by 28 and 24 per cent in Africa and Asia and Pacific regions, respectively. Similarly, the value of mobile money transactions increased from 26 per cent to 35 percent of GDP in Africa. Of the 76 per cent of people worldwide, who have an account at a financial institution, 36 per cent used a mobile phone or the internet to access their account. This has been driven by the adoption of digital technologies for carrying out financial transactions, such as mobile money, fast payment systems, digital identity, data sharing arrangements or, more generally, Digital Public Infrastructures (DPIs). Digital financial inclusion, secure and responsible digitally enabled financial services and products, also could be a key means to reach the remaining unbanked, financially excluded and underserved populations with a range of formal financial services suited to their needs. This will require greater use of national digital IDs to make it easy to open accounts. Identification is almost always a requirement for opening an account and own a mobile phone. This could benefit transaction costs and foster innovative models for small business. Responsible finance lending principles should also be promoted along with greater financial consumer protection as digital lending takes off in many markets.
4.2.	Redirecting investments towards the SDGs

Sustainable finance rose to prominence over the last three decades, on the back of growing investor interest. The modern approach to sustainable finance can be traced back to the 1990s, with a steady increase in investor interest since then. Since its emergence, the field has seen substantial progress, with industry players formalizing and codifying new investment practices at a blistering pace within a short time frame. The resulting high number of bottom-up standards and frameworks has led to confusion however, often hampering investor confidence. Growing political polarization has also led to backlash in some countries, with early signs already indicating a slowdown of investors’ use of the term ESG (Environmental, Social, and Governance) in 2023. 

While many challenges remain, the field has recently entered a maturation phase, with sustainable finance at a crossroads. Following a rapid development phase, the current moment presents an opportunity for refinement, recognizing that systemic transitions are lengthy and nonlinear (see for example the gradual century-long development of other fields like financial accounting). There is a need for an honest reassessment of the field’s real-world impact to help identify where complementary policy is necessary to achieve broader systemic change. Early maturation signals have included the clarification and consolidation of voluntary standards and regulatory and legislative action to further enhance impact (see section 4.2.4). 
4.2.1 Rising interest and deepening focus

Sustainable investing was a niche practice until a transformative shift in the late 1990s and a notable acceleration after 2015. Ethical funds emerged in the 1920s as an early form of socially responsible investing, restricting investments in industries that some investors considered unethical, such as tobacco and firearms. Despite their early origin, these funds had limited influence. With global conferences such as the Earth Summit in 1992, sustainable development became a more prominent concern for all stakeholders, including private actors. The 2015 global agreements – the Addis Ababa Action Agenda, the 2030 Agenda, and the Paris Agreement on Climate Change – accelerated field’s expansion (see Figure 13). These agreements shed light on rising systemic risks for investors and brought to the fore the interlinkages between social, environmental, economic, and financial factors. 


Figure 13
The evolution of sustainable finance: a timeline of select milestones

Source: UNDESA

ESG considerations are routinely considered by investors today. Over time, asset owners have increasingly recognized material risks that portfolio companies they own might pose to them, and that growing interest was creating investment opportunities in sustainable sectors. This has driven a shift in portfolio reallocation and sustainable investment and the growing integration of non-financial issues in investment decisions.  Some investors began to transition from considering these factors as philanthropic issues to seeing them as an integral part of risk management, and, for a growing number of actors, also realizing their value creation and impact potential. Additionally, asset owners have become more active owners or “stewards” of their investments and increasingly seek engagement with investee companies on sustainability issues. Today, around 85 per cent of Chief Investment Officers surveyed by McKinsey & Company consider ESG an important factor in their investment decisions. 

The interpretation of fiduciary duty evolved over time, but remains contested. Fiduciary duties ensure that asset owners (including institutional investors, insurers and banks), also known as fiduciaries, who exercise discretionary power in managing the assets of their beneficiaries and investors, act responsibly in the interest of their shareholders. Over time, interpretation of these duties has widened to include the consideration of ESG issues. Current practice mostly sees asset managers considering ESG risks within an overall process of commercial risk management, as studies have shown that responsible investment allows them to maximize long-term returns for their clients. A series of landmark reports, including the 2005 Freshfields Report and its sequel, Fiduciary Duty in the 21st Century, indeed concluded that investment approaches which consider ESG factors are permissible and arguably required for long-term investments. The rationale is that sustainability considerations will impact financial performance in the long-term, and neglecting ESG analysis may cause the mispricing of risks (whether legal, reputational, operational or systemic) leading to poor asset allocation and stranded assets.
Alternative, more ambitious, interpretations of fiduciary duty also emerged, encouraging fiduciaries to pursue sustainability goals that may reflect beneficiary preferences, regardless of whether these preferences are financially material. While financial return remains the primary goal of institutional investors today, further analysis shows that in some jurisdictions investors are already facing a legal obligation to consider setting and pursuing real-world sustainability impact goals where doing so can be effective in achieving their financial goals. However, amidst the current ESG backlash, critics have recently aimed to reopen the debate on fiduciary duty, opposing the evolution of the concept of and advocating for a return to its traditional interpretation (see section 4.2.3).

Box III.B.1. 
Decoding Sustainable Finance

Figure 14 	 Navigating a broad investment spectrum

Source: UNDESA and Global Investors for Sustainable Development Alliance based on: RIAA (Responsible Investment Association of Australasia), CFA Institute, Global Sustainable Investment Alliance, and Principles for Responsible Investment

A range of investment approaches are grouped under the term “sustainable investing”, with varying contributions to sustainable development (from left to right in Figure 14). Definitions and denominations for sustainable investing strategies are not always used consistently; terms like Responsible Investing, Socially Responsible Investing (SRI), and Sustainable Investing are frequently employed interchangeably, leading to confusion in the space. Moreover, despite being a subset of this space, the denomination ESG Investing is also commonly used as a proxy for sustainable investing as a whole. In a collaborative effort, the CFA Institute, Global Sustainable Investment Alliance, and Principles for Responsible Investment released a detailed report to consolidate language and interpretations of the investment spectrum in November 2023 (where applicable, these have been reflected in Figure 14).

Beyond allocating capital to sustainable strategies, sustainable investors can engage in stewardship, using their rights and influence to guide businesses towards more sustainable business models and practices. Stewardship spans all asset classes, although methods vary. Examples of how investors can exercise stewardship include serving on or nominating directors to a company's Board and filing shareholder resolutions or statements, for equity investments, or attaching ESG legal conditions to loans (such as conditions precedent and/or subsequent), for debt investments. Such practices have started with multilateral investors (e.g., the International Finance Corporation) and eventually spread to the whole investment ecosystem. Asset owners and managers today regularly engage on a wide range of environmental, governance and social issues.

4.2.2. Sustainable investing trends

Sustainable investing assets have grown significantly since 2016, albeit with some year-on-year declines following the COVID-19 pandemic. Global sustainable investing assets – defined here to include all strategies of ESG integration, norms-based screening, best-in-class screening, and impact investing – reached $30.3 trillion in 2022, representing a significant increase from 2016, but below record heights of 2020 and 2021. The most recent decline was fueled by high oil prices and the turbulent economic environment during the COVID-19 pandemic. Looking at the subset of sustainable products (sustainable funds, bonds, and voluntary carbon markets), rather than the entire universe of strategy-based approaches, sustainable products reached $5.8 trillion in 2022.

Figure 15
Global sustainable investing assets, 2016-2022
(USD Billion)

Note: A change in US SIF methodology added to the material decrease of US and total AUM in 2022
Source: Global Sustainable Investment Alliance (GSIA)	

Sustainable investment funds experienced a surge in inflows through 2021; and continued to outpace the broader market in 2022 and 2023. Sustainable funds reached $2.56 trillion in assets under management (AuM) at the end of 2023, representing roughly 10 per cent of all sustainable assets. Their inflows of net new deposits peaked at $558 billion in 2021 during the pandemic period, but subsequently experienced a decline to $158 billion in 2022 and $72 billion in 2023, though inflows remained positive and outpaced flows into traditional funds, which suffered net outflows. But in absolute numbers, sustainable fund assets have remained a small share of total fund assets under management, representing less than 5 per cent of total global fund assets (i.e., $2.56 trillion of $55.16 trillion at the end of November 2023). 

Sustainable funds are mostly domiciled in developed countries, which also dominate capital allocation. Europe hosts the majority of sustainable funds, capturing 81 per cent of the market; the United States is the second-largest contributor at 13 per cent; and all other countries combined account for only 6 per cent of total market share. In terms of allocation, taking impact capital in 2023 as an example, the highest portion went to the U.S. and Canada (29 per cent of impact AuM), followed by Western, Northern & Southern Europe (23 per cent) and sub-Saharan Africa (10 per cent).

ESG integration and negative screening strategies dominate the field, with impact investing representing only a modest fraction of total sustainable assets. Across a wide sustainable investing spectrum (see Box III.B.1), the majority of sustainable asset managers today prioritize "ESG integration". This consists in integrating ESG factors into investment decisions to better manage risks and possibly enhance financial returns. The surging interest in ESG strategies is evident in the quadrupling of the number of asset managers and asset owners signing the Principles for Responsible Investment (PRI) from 2015 to 2023, although their minimum requirements do not allow to reflect the actual level of ESG integration from signatories. Negative screening is the second most popular approach, while impact investing or thematic investing remain much smaller in scale (see Figure 16). This may in part reflect these strategies’ short-term effects on financial performance. Impact or thematic investing, characterized by more structural biases and focus on single industries (e.g., funds concentrated on the clean energy value chain), generally underperform other more flexible traditional or ESG strategies in the short-term. For instance, Article 9 products in the EU (i.e., where sustainable investment is the primary objective as per the EU Sustainable Finance Disclosure Regulation) have come under pressure in the current inflationary landscape, underperforming by -1.7 per cent in Q1 of 2023. 

Figure 16	 Sustainable Investing Assets by strategy, 2016-2022
 Source: Global Sustainable Investment Alliance (GSIA)	

Impact investing, although not yet dominant, holds growth potential and is gaining significant momentum. Impact assets under management surpassed $1.164 trillion in 2022, and continued to grow across nearly every region in 2023. Impact investing strategies are also evolving in both depth and sophistication. This is exemplified for example in the rise of impact lenses, which can complement impact strategies focused on sectors (e.g., renewable energy investments), by applying cross-cutting social themes (e.g., applying a social lens to a renewable energy fund). These lenses have the potential to enhance investors’ impacts by integrating overlooked injustices that indirectly affect the outcome of all investments. Impact lenses include a gender lens, a racial equity lens, and a recently developed child lens. 

The impact investing market’s growth is fueled, in part, by the rapid rise of labeled bonds. Some of the labeled bonds that meet the GIIN’s definition of impact investing (e.g., certain types of green bonds and other use-of-proceed bonds) have been integrated to total impact market figures for 2022 (i.e., $1.164 trillion). Taken separately, total labeled bond issuance reached $946 billion in 2023, showing a small rebound (of 2.2 per cent) after a decline in 2022. As a whole, sustainable bond issuance grew five-fold over the past five years (see Figure 17). Labelled bonds span use-of-proceeds (UoP) bonds (e.g., green, social, sustainability bonds), which finance earmarked green or sustainable activities, and sustainability-linked bonds (SLBs), which are general purpose bonds wherein issuers commit to improving overall firm performance against environmental or social key performance indicators (KPIs). Representing only 6 per cent of all issuances, SLBs face challenges in scaling. While these instruments offer flexibility for business models unsuited to use-of-proceeds bonds, questions remain regarding the targets’ rigor and ambition, and their capacity to influence issuers’ incentives. Despite also contending with some structural weaknesses (e.g., greenwashing concerns, lack of standardization and verification), the green bond model has given rise to a range of use-of-proceeds bonds (e.g., blue bonds, resilience bonds, transition bonds, orange bonds). As of today, green bonds are the favored instrument (60 per cent of total issuance) with a primary focus on climate mitigation. Sustainable Fitch predicts a continued rise of biodiversity and social use-of-proceeds instruments going forward. Guidance is gradually emerging to incentivize market uptake of these newer instruments, such as for example the Guidance on Sovereign SDG Bonds for Countries and Investors developed by the Global Investors for Sustainable Development (GISD) Alliance under the leadership of UN DESA and UNDP, as well as the recent Climate Bonds Initiative's Climate Resilience Classification Framework for resilience bonds.

Despite their potential, the global GSSS bond market remains largely concentrated in high income countries, much like other sustainable assets. Looking at the use-of-proceeds green, social and sustainability bonds (GSS) bonds subset, for example, in 2022, only 13 per cent of the overall GSS bond market was issued by entities in developing countries (further reducing to around 5 per cent when not including China). Bottlenecks to increasing GSS and SLB bond issuances in developing countries include illiquid domestic capital markets, lack of bankable and relevant projects, limited familiarity with international investors, complex public budgeting processes, and the high level and often voluntary nature of applicable global standards.

Figure 17
Annual global sustainable bond issuance (GSS) by label
(USD Billion)
 Note: 2024F represents the full-year sustainable bond issuance forecast.
Source: Moody's Investors Service, Environmental Finance Data and Dealogic	

4.2.3. Persisting Challenges

The sustainable finance field still grapples with challenges that limit both scale and impact. These include: 
	A weak information infrastructure leading to data gaps and greenwashing risks. High-quality, exhaustive, and comparable data are prerequisites for informed investment decisions. Despite recent progress, a weak information infrastructure reduces market transparency and increases risks of “greenwashing”;
	A lack of global standardization in terminology, standards, and frameworks. A lack of consensus on terminology as well as the coexistence of various standards and investment approaches, lead to complexity and confusion in the field, although harmonization efforts are ongoing;
	Flawed ESG Ratings. ESG ratings are failing to restore investor confidence, compounding existing challenges;
	Political polarization. An “ESG backlash” has introduced new reputational and regulatory risks for investors;
	Systemic barriers within the wider financial system. The persistence of traditional forms of investment alongside the increasing adoption of sustainable investing, and the limited share of more ambitious impact investing strategies, highlight broader systemic obstacles. 
Weak information architecture

Data gaps and inconsistencies limit investor ability to make informed decisions. Data is a prerequisite to assess and price risks and opportunities. The number of companies and General Partners (GPs) reporting on sustainability data has increased over time, namely due to Limited Partners’ (LPs) increasing demands. However, while 98 per cent of S&P 500 companies engaged in sustainability disclosure in 2022, available data is still inconsistent and difficult to compare, pointing to remaining quality and relevance issues. Non-listed entities and entities in developing markets present even greater data availability and quality challenges, due to fewer reporting requirements from investors and regulators. Standard-setters, international organizations and industry players have started working to improve the data landscape (see section 4.2.4).

A fragmented data landscape increases greenwashing risks, further jeopardizing the accurate identification of sustainable investments. Greenwashing refers to misrepresenting the sustainability profile of an entity or product through omissions, unsubstantiated claims, inconsistency, or exaggeration., It can be carried out by both investors and investee companies, and has become an important concern for all market participants, undermining their confidence in the sustainable investment industry. Authorities are starting to adjust regulatory and supervisory mandates in response to data and greenwashing challenges (see section 4.2.4).	
Lack of standardization

The rapid evolution of sustainable finance has given rise to a multifaceted system of norms and standards. The field predominantly evolved from the bottom-up, with market practitioners shaping industry rules based on international organizations' foundational principles. A diverse array of principles, standards, frameworks, and ratings emerged (see Figure 18). This in turn led to some confusion in the field. For example, the proliferation of reporting frameworks contributed to the information infrastructure fragmentation, although harmonization efforts are ongoing (see section 4.2.4).

A wider challenge lies in the lack of clearly defined terminologies, including with the debated "ESG” concept. Various investing approaches fall under the umbrella term of "sustainable investing," leading to the use, and often misuse, of different terms. Moreover, confusion arises within the sub-set of ESG investing itself. First, ESG is often equated with environmental topics only. Moreover, critics argue that the scope of ESG issues remains too broad, with a high and varying number of issues under each pillar (i.e., the environmental, social and governance pillars), resulting in a loss of clarity and strategic focus. The process of consolidating and refining definitions has started, including through the adoption of taxonomies (see section 4.2.4).

Figure 18. 
A multifaceted system of sustainable finance norms

Source: UNDESA
Flawed ESG Ratings

ESG ratings have so far not been able to contribute to better quality and robust information on sustainability issues nor deliver on their promise to lengthen the time horizons of investment benchmarks. ESG and SDG indices, along with sustainability-inclusive credit ratings, have a role to play in to strengthening and supporting access to reliable sustainability information, which is key to investors, particularly in the absence of audited sustainability reports. Additionally, sustainability-aligned benchmarks, as a subset of ratings, can contribute to lengthening investors’ time horizons and performance incentives.   However, these ratings face legitimacy issues, with ESG/SDG scores showing low correlation among providers at less than 60 per cent, compared to 99 per cent for financial ratings. Moreover, there are methodological challenges and transparency gaps in aggregation criteria and the underlying information (e.g., relating to estimates). These are particularly evident in SDG ratings, which may oversimplify companies' positive contributions by linking sector categorization to certain impacts, neglecting the specifics of a company's activities within that sector. Concerns about potential conflicts of interest have also been brought forward, as a few major players dominate both the credit rating and sustainability ratings markets.   There have been recent voluntary and regulatory efforts to tackle these outstanding issues, including a Code of Conduct launched in December 2023 and regulatory action in several countries, following IOSCO’s recommendations (see Table 2 in section 4.2.4).
 
Political Polarization

The field has become increasingly politicized amidst an "ESG backlash”. This is manifesting in some jurisdictions in scepticism regarding ESG integration, objections to evolving perceptions of fiduciary duty, and other, more opportunistic factors and ideologies. According to a recent survey, financial services and insurance industries have been most targeted by the backlash, with some financial institutions facing legal action for upholding ESG criteria. This has caused a visible shift in discourse, although it is still too early to assess long lasting effects on sustainability programs. In 2023, 30 per cent of asset managers removed references to “ESG” or “net zero” from their marketing materials and websites in the United States. Only 61 S&P 500 companies mentioned ESG in earning calls, a 60 per cent decline from 2021.
Systemic barriers

Systemic factors continue to favor traditional investment strategies and limit the scale of sustainable investing. Costs of capital continue to favor traditional investments, as they do not yet systematically reflect long-term sustainability risks. This is especially the case for investments with shorter holding periods. According to an analysis by S&P Global Ratings, since 2010, borrowing costs for oil and gas firms in the U.S. and Europe have closely mirrored those of other debt issuers, with no premium for bonds issued by oil and gas companies. Conversely, an analysis of euro-area credit register indicates that banks have applied higher interest rates to firms with higher carbon emissions during the period of 2018-2022. This could be attributed at least in part to the longer loan terms for bank credits. Indeed, an analysis of the world’s largest public institutional investors revealed that more than half these asset owners consider the material impacts of sustainability issues, such as climate change, a determining factor in their investment strategies and portfolio selection. Extending investors’ time horizons is thus imperative to align their objectives with long-term sustainable development trends.
4.2.4. Maturation

Sustainable finance is showing signs of maturation. Despite the varying pace of change across regions and industries, several consistent trends are emerging:
1.	The streamlining and refinement of voluntary standards. Standard-setters have started the consolidation and sophistication of voluntary disclosure standards and management frameworks;
2.	The adoption of national and regional legislation. A burgeoning body of sustainable finance legislation is addressing issues related to the sustainable finance information infrastructure and broader investor duties.

However, persistent challenges remain in aligning finance with global sustainability goals, requiring collaborative efforts among countries and continued public-private cooperation. The upcoming fourth international conference on Financing for Development (FfD) offers a timely platform for Member States to continue collaborating towards (i) widespread adoption and coordination of sustainable finance legislation to allow for interoperability and prevent fragmentation, while taking into account for regional and local specificities; (ii) mandatory disclosure standards with a double materiality vision at national level; (iii) facilitation of impact investing at scale; and (iv) adoption of a more systemic whole-of-government approach that makes sustainable finance policy part of a broader set of economic and financial policies that align all financial flows to national and international sustainability goals. 
Consolidating and clarifying voluntary standards

An early signal of market maturation has been progress around the consolidation of disclosure standards for stronger ESG data infrastructure. Leading this effort are two primary standard-setters: the Global Reporting Initiative (GRI), established in 1997 post-Exxon Valdez for corporate accountability, and the International Sustainability Standards Board (ISSB), founded in 2021 in response to investor-focused reporting demands at the UNFCCC COP26. The ISSB consolidated five major reporting standards, including: the Task Force on Climate-Related Financial Disclosures (TCFD), the Climate Disclosure Standards Board (CDSB), which included the Carbon Disclosure Project (CDP), and the Value Reporting Foundation (VRF), which housed the Sustainability Accounting Standards Board (SASB), as well as the International Integrated Reporting Framework (IIRC). The ISSB's inaugural standards on sustainability-related financial disclosures (S1) and climate-remated financial disclosures (S2) were published in June 2023 and endorsed by IOSCO thereafter.

Differing materiality visions should eventually converge into a double materiality approach, ensuring short-term interoperability. Operating under the umbrella of the International Financial Reporting Standards (IFRS) Foundation, which also houses the International Accounting Standards Board, the ISSB supports financial (or single) materiality for investor-decision-making. This approach adopts an “inward” vision, prioritizing sustainability issues affecting entities’ cash flow and value. On the other hand, GRI focuses on impact materiality from an “outward” perspective, prioritizing matters that have an impact on the economy, society, and the environment, thereby catering to a wider range of stakeholders (see Figure 19). A third perspective, double materiality, integrates both perspectives, in a two-pillar structure with equal footing. This perspective was endorsed by EFRAG for its European Sustainability Reporting Standards (ESRS) in 2023, as well as by China’s three major stock markets in early 2024. Given the coexistence of single, impact, and double materiality approaches, interoperability is crucial in the short-term. ISSB and GRI have made significant progress through an MoU, referencing GRI in ISSB standards, and developing targeted interoperability guidance, including for GHG emissions reporting.

Figure 19. 
Materiality visions
 Source: UNDESA

Assurance standards are a key component to reporting standards, as mechanisms for auditing disclosures are essential to ensure data reliability and comparability. IOSCO has begun to work to coordinate and promote global consistency for sustainability assurance standards, similarly to what it has done so far with sustainability reporting. IOSCO began work in 2022 on assessing whether the existing sustainability assurance ecosystem is fit for purpose or whether further enhancements, including through standard setting, will be required. IOSCO has engaged key stakeholder groups, including the International Auditing and Assurance Standards Board and the International Ethics Standards Board for Accountants. The International Auditing and Assurance Standards Board (IAASB) is currently developing a standard for assurance on sustainability reporting, with plans to publish it before the end of 2024. The assurance standard will apply to sustainability information prepared under different reporting standards, including the ISSB’s. As jurisdictions transpose and adapt voluntary standards in national legislation, they can also opt to tailor assurance requirements to their specific legislative provisions, such as the EU with CSRD.

Moreover, a wide range of initiatives have emerged to strengthen and deepen the field’s data information architecture. Guidance by international organizations has emerged to help investors navigate the landscape of voluntary standards, including studies  and a wide range of databases (see for example UN Global Sustainable Finance Observatory and the Global Economic Monitor).

Beyond data, clarification is also underway for management frameworks, but persistent fragmentation highlights the need for consolidation. While reporting standards have been a focal point in sustainable finance discussions, they constitute just one element in investors' sustainability management toolkit. Management frameworks provide comprehensive guidance for designing and implementing sustainability systems, encompassing aspects from strategy-setting and governance to operationalization throughout the investment process. They are necessary to ensure that disclosure is coupled with actual management of sustainability impact, as studies have shown that disclosure alone is not sufficient to influence lending. In the impact space, translating the SDGs—used by 75 percent of impact investors as a baseline framework—into effective guidelines for financial institutions has led to a proliferation of impact management frameworks. Industry groups like the Impact Management Platform (IMP) and the Global Investors for Sustainable Investment (GISD) Alliance have worked to enhance clarity with a System Map and an SDG Navigator, respectively, which summarize and categorize available resources. However, despite strides in transparency, fragmentation endures, highlighting the need for consolidation, akin to the approach taken with reporting standards. Early indications of consolidation have been noticed, such as for instance the announcement by the Global Impact Investing Network (GIIN) that it would host the IFC Operating Principles for Impact Management from 2022.
Accelerating the adoption and harmonization of sustainable finance legislation

Sustainable finance is increasingly embedded in regulatory and legislative frameworks. Countries are strengthening the financial sector’s role in advancing sustainable development. Several databases have emerged to record progress made., As of July 2023, the Green Finance Measures Database registered over 780 sustainable finance policy measures in 109 countries, a 70 per cent increase since 2015. Taxonomies and disclosure legislation have been at the heart of legislative efforts, with at least 30 taxonomies and 200 frameworks, standards and guidelines on sustainability and climate disclosures in place across 40 countries. By setting out clear and transparent criteria for sustainable economic activities, such regulatory frameworks can enable the development of a reliable and credible market for allocating capital to the sustainability transition. Table 2 below provides an overview and example of sustainable finance legislation along four main categories: alignment definitions (e.g., taxonomies), data availability and reliability (e.g., disclosure legislation, investment product labels, greenwashing) and data comparability (e.g., regulating ESG ratings), as well as investor duties (e.g., stewardship-related legislation). Such sustainable finance policy tools are be complemented by wider national strategies or frameworks mainstreaming sustainability considerations, as well as other sector-specific and product-specific measures.




Table 2.	 Sustainable finance legislation – Key Policy Categories & Prominent Examples
Legislation
Description
Prominent examples
Category 1: Alignment
Taxonomies 
Classification systems for sustainable economic activities, defining alignment criteria based on shared sustainability goals.
Green taxonomies
•	EU Green Taxonomy 
•	Colombia Green Taxonomy 
Social Taxonomies
•	Georgia Sustainable Finance Taxonomy
Transition taxonomies (with traffic light system)
•	Singapore Green & Transition Taxonomy
SDG Taxonomies
•	China Technical Report on SDG Finance Taxonomy
Category 2: Data Availability
Disclosure legislation
Corporate and investor sustainability disclosure requirements, including mandatory assurance provisions.
•	Countries accounting for nearly half of the world’s GDP have either passed or proposed sustainability-related disclosure legislation, with many jurisdictions contemplating ISSB adoption
•	A prominent example is the EU Corporate Sustainability Reporting Directive (CSRD) (and its European Sustainability Reporting Standards)
Category 3: Data & Product Reliability and Comparability
Greenwashing & Conduct-related legislation
Financial and consumer product classifications (e.g., regulating fund classification systems, regulating eco-labels)
•	UK FCA Financial Conduct Authority (FCA) Sustainability Disclosure Requirements (SDR) 
•	Switzerland’s Federal Department of Finance (FDF) sustainable investment labelling rules
•	EU Sustainable Finance Disclosure Regulation (SFDR) and EU Proposed Directive on Green claims (consumer products)
ESG rating legislation
Regulating ESG service providers’ methods and transparency
•	Regulatory action emerging in different countries including Japan, Hong Kong as well as the EU
Category 4: Investor duties
Stewardship-related legislation
Outlining good practice for investor engagement with companies and related issues, such as proxy voting
•	UK Stewardship Code 
•	European Union Shareholder Rights Directive II (2017/828/EU) 
Source: UNDESA

The growing regionalization of sustainable finance legislation already unveils disparities and fragmentation among jurisdictions, highlighting the need for global interoperability. Sustainable finance legislation is being tailored to regional priorities, as seen by the different taxonomies adopted by the EU, Latin America, and Asia-Pacific, each emphasizing different social or environmental aspects reflecting their unique local fabric. While regionalization is legitimate and important, without effective coordination it risks causing fragmentation and high compliance burdens for investors. This would reverse progress made on standards’ consolidation and heighten the risk of investors underestimating the sustainability credentials of funds (IOSCO already warns of emerging "green muting" and "green bleaching" practices). This emphasizes the necessity for, at minimum, global collaboration on interoperability, while simultaneously exploring a global foundational framework which would also leave room for regional adaptation. For example, a global taxonomy could link all industry activities to a global framework such as the SDGs, helping regions to harmonize their own visions across regional taxonomies. There is already a growing focus on harmonization and interoperability of policies and regulations across jurisdictions to accelerate flows of sustainable finance.

With uneven progress across regions, promoting universal coverage requires addressing several challenges. As of today, the majority of sustainable finance legislation is being adopted in developed economies (62 per cent of 109 countries). Successful implementation of sustainable finance legislation requires bolstering institutional means, legal frameworks, and capital markets, through enhanced capacity building support and technical guidance. The UN Global Sustainable Finance Observatory (GFSO) informs UN capacity building efforts on sustainability disclosure, taxonomies, carbon pricing and sector and product specific measures. Stock exchanges can also play an important role in helping markets navigate new ESG requirements. The number of exchanges that have written ESG disclosure guidance, mandatory ESG reporting, ESG training, and related bond and equity offerings has increased in the past few years. Moreover, support from development cooperation providers is needed to build capacity in developing countries to access sustainable finance, including the use of innovative instruments, such as insurance and investment based on results, to mitigate risk and attract external resources aligned to the SDGs without increasing debt distress. Strengthening the climate information architecture and aligning the practices and products of financial and information intermediaries can contribute to scaling up blended finance for climate mitigation and adaptation in emerging markets and developing countries (see Network for Greening the Financial System Technical Document on Scaling up Blended Finance for Climate Mitigation and Adaptation in Emerging Markets and Developing Economies).

Legislative efforts should incentivize impact across asset classes, in line with Agenda 2030 and global climate goals, while being carefully crafted to avoid distortions. Only 14 percent of impact investors perceived progress in government support over the last decade. A global taxonomy linking global industry activities to the SDGs could be the first step towards improving the identification of SDG-aligned investments, supported by policies financially incentivizing them. These include: (i) developing the supply of capital, such as through risk-sharing mechanisms, adjusted market costs and improved transaction efficiency or guarantees; (ii) developing related pipelines and capacity of capital recipients. To address current funding gaps, a specific focus could be placed on channelling impact funds towards underfunded sectors, particularly those requiring private investment to complement public funds (e.g., climate adaptation and disaster risk reduction activities). Nevertheless, such incentives should be carefully crafted to avoid distortions and stability risks for the global financial system.

New disclosure legislation should aim to facilitate the measurement of the private sector's progress towards impact and climate goals, by adopting an impact or double materiality perspective. Countries accounting for nearly half of the world GDP are adopting disclosure legislation, with many having already pledged the transposition of ISSB standards. Jurisdictions already contemplating ISSB adoption can leverage current progress and integrate additional provisions for a double materiality vision. his be misconstrued as imposing additional burdens on investors, it aligns with the objective of preventing fragmentation across jurisdictions and reducing investor confusion, which in turn decreases the transaction costs of high compliance burdens (i.e., global investors having to prepare different sustainability reports to comply with varying and double materiality requirements across different jurisdictions). Additionally, the double materiality approach mitigates medium to long-term transition risks for policymakers and investors. It sides with transition-aligned legislation, which will progressively demand increased accountability from companies regarding their externalities and contributions to global climate goals.

Beyond policies focused on improving or widening the field, sustainable finance must become integrated into broader efforts to achieve sustainable transformations. Regulatory frameworks need to consider the roles of actors across the financial system including banks, insurers and banks – to align financial flows with national, regional or global sustainability objectives. Sustainable finance policy must be seen as part of a whole-of-government approach and a wider set of economic and financial policies that together create enabling conditions for sustainable transformations. Sustainable finance policy reform has already moved from a siloed approach led by environmental ministries to a key consideration for financial policy makers. This includes the consideration of the interplay between sustainability and financial stability (see also chapter III.F), such as through climate transition plans (see for example the recommendations of the Network for Greening the Financial System on transition plans for banks or Glasgow Financial Alliance for Net Zero Net-zero Transition Plans report). It also includes broader fiscal and regulatory policies to create the ‘right’ (sustainability-aligned) incentives for real economy actors, and financial sector and macro-economic policies supportive of sustainable transformations that create investment opportunities for sustainable finance at scale. 










