III.C.	International development cooperation

1.	Key messages and recommendations
International development cooperation has grown since the adoption of the Monterrey Consensus in 2002. At the same time, the demands on development cooperation have also increased substantially, including due to ever-growing impacts of the climate crisis and an expanding and more ambitious global development agenda. Most recently, the COVID-19 pandemic, the war in Ukraine, and the cost-of-living crises have placed unprecedented demands on international development cooperation. Urgent action is needed to boost all types of international development cooperation and to use them as effectively as possible, not least by fulfilling long-standing commitments on official development assistance (ODA) and climate finance. 

Official development assistance (ODA) has reached new heights, but still falls short of both needs and commitments and is under pressure to respond to growing needs. In 2022, ODA provided by members of the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD) Development Assistance Committee (DAC) reached $211 billion. It has more than doubled in real terms compared to the beginning of the millennium. Yet, in a more crisis-prone world, there are concerns that growing expenditure on refugees and humanitarian aid, as well as climate mitigation, will come at the expense of support for long-term investments and support for other development priorities. This highlights the urgent need to increase the total ODA envelope to ensure additional resources are available to address mounting challenges, and that these resources are targeted appropriately to countries most in need. Collectively, donors have also continued to fall short of ODA commitments, with a decreasing number of countries – four in 2022 – meeting the UN target of providing 0.7 per cent of GNI as ODA.  

Countries that are particularly vulnerable to the adverse effects of climate change and to debt vulnerabilities, such as the least developed countries (LDCs) and the Small Island Developing States (SIDS) need more concessional resources and grants. To better take into account vulnerabilities of countries, such as LDCs and SIDS, measures of vulnerability could be considered to inform allocation decisions for concessional financing. At the same time, innovative financing instruments and mechanisms should be explored to raise additional resources for financing sustainable development. The fourth international conference on financing for development could build on recent and renewed interest in innovative financing to bring mechanisms to scale. 

The multilateral development banks (MDBs) are in a unique position to accelerate investments in sustainable development. MDBs remain a critical source of affordable long-term finance for developing countries, as well as countercyclical support in times of crisis. At the same time, paid-in capital bases of MDBs have not increased in line with the expansion of the global economy or growing investment needs. Recent global shocks have increased the urgency for MDBs and their shareholders to review their scale, roles, and functions, to adapt and respond to the challenges in achieving the SDGs. In response, the MDBs have begun to undertake a wide range of reforms to expand their financial capacity as well as to enhance their development impact, including through addressing global public goods, aligning lending and operations with the SDGs and improving the measurement of development and climate impact. The upcoming 21st replenishment of the World Bank’s International Development Association (IDA), which is the primary source of concessional finance for LDCs and other lower-income countries, will need to be the largest ever to help meet SDG financing needs. The fourth international conference on financing for development should galvanize progress on these efforts to achieve ambitious outcomes.  

Development co-operation needs to step up its political and financial engagement in mobilising other (public and private) financial resources for sustainable development. The Addis Agenda recognized the importance of international public finance being catalytic. While there have been many good examples of such catalytic use of development cooperation, they remain too limited in scale and scope. Political engagement at home as well as technical assistance is needed to ensure that development cooperation does help mobilize other resources, e.g., additional tax revenue by providing capacity support in this area, sustainable finance by deepening local markets, and mobilization of private investment at scale and for impact, through a new approach to blended finance focused on impact.  Support for sustainable trade and responsible business conduct can ensure trade and investment flows contribute to sustainable development. 

Climate finance – and the alignment of international development co-operation with climate and biodiversity goals – are not keeping pace with the escalating impacts of climate change. While climate finance has grown over time and an increasing share of climate-related development finance also targets biodiversity goals, commitments have yet to be fully met. Climate finance flows, mainly adaptation finance, remains grossly inadequate, particularly for the most vulnerable countries causing a further widening of the financing gap. While the creation of the Loss and Damage Fund marks a historic milestone, more financial commitments will be crucial.  At the same time, the increasingly complex and fragmented global climate finance architecture has not only created monitoring and reporting challenges, but has also made coordination and access to finance more difficult for developing countries, especially LDCs and SIDS. Several proposals have been made to improve the climate finance governance structure.  Concerns also remain over how to ensure additionality of support for climate change mitigation and other areas that have a global public good character. The fourth international conference on financing for development provides an opportunity to address these challenges, including additionality, and ensure that climate finance is effectively delivered at scale. 

The effectiveness of development cooperation must be revitalized to pursue better development results and strengthen trust in a rapidly changing financing landscape. International development cooperation has changed in multiple ways over the last decade, with a more diverse set of providers, different modalities and more complex instruments, which have increased burdens on developing countries. Amidst all these changes, delivering support effectively remains as important as ever, including to better allocate and mobilise more resources, yet attention to the quality, impact and effectiveness of development cooperation has been lagging. 

This chapter will give a brief overview of ODA trends over the past two decades within the context of a more crisis-prone world. It then elaborates on the role of MDBs, including as critical source of affordable long-term finance to developing countries.  It also discusses developments in the area of blended finance and mobilized private finance. The chapter concludes with a discussion of South-South cooperation and, lastly, of finance for climate change and biodiversity.

2.	Official development assistance 
ODA trends in a more crisis-prone world 

While ODA has risen to record highs in recent years, it has failed to keep pace with escalating needs, and continues to fall short of commitments. ODA levels have risen significantly over the past three years, driven by responses to multiple crises, including the COVID-19 pandemic and the war in Ukraine. In 2022, ODA provided by members of the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) Development Assistance Committee (DAC) rose by 17 per cent in real terms to reach an all-time high of $211 billion, as calculated by the new grant-equivalent measure (figure III.C.1). However, this sharp increase was largely attributed to a surge in donor countries’ spending on processing and hosting refugees, as well as aid for Ukraine. ODA to Ukraine from DAC countries surged from less than $1 billion in 2021 to $17.8 billion in 2022. Excluding in-donor refugee costs, ODA in 2022 increased by 7.3 per cent in real terms compared to 2021. Recent increases in ODA continue a broader upward trend since the adoption of the Millennium Declaration in 2000. Based on the previous cash-flow methodology, total net ODA to developing countries has more than doubled in real terms compared to two decades ago (figure III.C.2). But most OECD DAC members are not meeting their international commitments. Since 2000, DAC donors, on average, have consistently failed to provide 0.7 per cent of gross national income (GNI) as ODA and 0.15–0.20 per cent of GNI to the LDCs (table III.C.1). In 2022, four countries met or exceeded the 0.7 per cent target and only two donor countries, Luxembourg, and Sweden, met or exceeded both targets.
 
Figure III.C.1
Official development assistance on grant equivalent terms, 2018 – 2022  


Source: OECD Creditor Reporting System database. 

Figure III.C.2
Official development assistance on a cash basis by component, 2000 – 2022  
(Billions of United States dollars, 2021 constant prices)


Source: OECD Creditor Reporting System database. 

Figure III.C.3
CPA, humanitarian ODA and in-donor refugee costs, as shares of official development assistance , 2010 – 2022  
(Billions of United States dollars, 2021 constant prices, and per cent)


Source: OECD 

Table III.C.1: OECD DAC performance against international commitments 


Target
2000
2007
2012
2016
2020
2021
2022
ODA as a share of GNI 
0.7
0.22
0.27
0.28
0.32
0.33
0.33
0.37
No. of countries that met target

4
5
5
5
6
5
4
ODA to LDCs as a share of GNI
0.15 - 0.20
0.05
0.08
0.09
0.09
0.09
0.09
0.08
No. of countries that met target 

7
9
8
6
6
5
3
Source: OECD Creditor Reporting System database. 

There are growing concerns that in a more crisis-prone world, persistently higher spending on refugees and humanitarian aid will come at the expense of support for long-term SDG investments. Amid a series of humanitarian crises and more prolonged conflicts, in-donor refugee costs and humanitarian aid as a share of total net ODA have increased from just over 9 per cent in 2000 to 25 per cent in 2022 (figure III.C.2 and III.C.3). This trajectory poses a risk of diverting ODA support away from the poorest and other vulnerable countries, and for investment in the SDGs and climate action. In 2022, DAC countries’ bilateral aid to the LDCs and sub-Saharan Africa fell by 5.2 per cent and 8.6 per cent, respectively. This highlights the urgent need to increase the total ODA envelope to ensure additional resources are available to address the mounting challenges to sustainable development. Given the difficulty to budget for volatile humanitarian funding and in-donor costs, setting targets on country-programmable aid (CPA) in addition to total ODA could reduce the risk of diversion of resources from important multi-year projects for sustainable development.

As more countries pass per capita income “graduation” thresholds, more efforts are needed across all contexts to ensure a smooth and sustainable transition from requiring international support. In the context of international development cooperation, “graduation” encompasses three separate events namely, graduation from: i) ODA eligibility; ii) multilateral concessional assistance, including concessional windows at MDBs (see MDB section); and (iii) LDC status. A country’s gross national income (GNI) per capita is a key metric in determining graduation in the former 2, and also plays a role in LDC graduation (which also includes measurement of a country’s human resources and vulnerability). There is a need to strengthen the support provided to countries as they undergo graduation in all contexts, including by enhancing emphasis on pre-graduation planning, capacity development, and extending exceptional and temporary support measures. As income per capita increases, some countries lose access to concessional finance, which enhances the risk of financing gaps in critical areas of sustainable development, such as health and education. Graduates that are highly vulnerable to climate-related disasters and shocks and other natural disasters face additional challenges. In response, in the 2020 and 2023 OECD triennial reviews of the DAC list of ODA-eligible countries, a few SIDS countries were granted a delay in their graduation from ODA eligibility. ODA providers are also increasingly including greater flexibilities for different risks and vulnerabilities that graduated countries may encounter. In 2018, the DAC agreed on a set of rules and criteria for reinstating a country on the DAC List of ODA recipients that had graduated, particularly if the country has suffered a large negative per capita income shock. As discussed below, there are exceptions for multilateral concessional assistance that, for example, allow SIDS to access concessional funding even if they exceed income thresholds. However, there is a need to strengthen and institutionalize support provided to countries as they undergo graduation in all contexts. This could include enhancing emphasis on mobilisation of broader public and private resources, pre-graduation planning, capacity development in areas where financing constraints may be greatest, and extending exceptional and temporary support measures for countries in transition. 

Vulnerability criteria could be used to complement income measures in allocation decisions for concessional financing. Growing systemic risks and more frequent and severe natural hazards have increased the urgency of incorporating vulnerabilities into access to concessional finance. For SIDS, in particular, their small size, remoteness, and high vulnerability to climate-related shocks have constrained their capacity to mobilize public resources domestically. Hence, many low- and middle-income SIDS rely on ODA to a significant extent, while other high-income SIDS saw significant accumulation of external debt. The new Multidimensional Vulnerability Index (MVI), which offers a comprehensive approach to characterize and measure vulnerabilities, could complement income-based criteria to determine more accurately the needs for accessing additional sources of financing and highlights the steps that countries must take to build structural resilience. In its final report published in September 2023, the High-level Panel of Experts found that 70 per cent of SIDS, 63 per cent of LDCs and 50 per cent of LLDCs scored above the median, highlighting their structural vulnerability and lack of resilience across multiple sustainable development dimensions. However, any decision to incorporate vulnerability criteria in allocation decisions must be carefully analysed for impacts on all eligible countries, and ensure alignment with eligibility criteria of allocation frameworks.  

Focus areas of ODA allocation have shifted in response to changing global priorities and emerging challenges. Country programmable aid (CPA), which excludes donor refugee costs, humanitarian aid, debt relief and administrative costs, is the portion of aid that donors can programme for individual countries or regions, and over which partner countries could have a greater say. CPA has declined compared to its peak in 2009, coinciding with the growing focus of aid providers on humanitarian aid and refugee expenditure. In volume terms, CPA to developing countries has increased significantly over the past twenty years, mirroring the overall increase in ODA, and reaching a total of $97 billion in 2022 (figure III.C.4). CPA to most developing regions, including LDCs, LLDCs, and Africa, grew at a rapid pace in the 2000s, but declined for many recipient countries in the post-global financial crisis period: between 2011 and 2019 total CPA to the LLDCs and the SIDS contracted at an annual average rate of 1.2 per cent and 3.0 per cent, respectively. Amid the impact of recent crises and competing demands, a more constrained ODA budget environment could further decrease CPA to vulnerable countries. 

On a sectoral basis, aid to social sectors remains the largest category of ODA to developing countries. Support to social sectors is crucial to help vulnerable countries strengthen their systems and build resilience to future shocks. Prior to the pandemic, ODA for the social sectors, including health and social protection systems, was on a declining trend, particularly for the LDCs, LLDCs and SIDS. This trend has partially reversed over the last three years driven by responses to COVID-19. Overall, aid flows do not, at the aggregate level, seem to be well-matched with recipient country priorities, even though alignment with country priorities is acknowledged to be a key factor in the quality and effectiveness of development cooperation. For example, since 2009, LLDCs have experienced a steady decline in assistance channelled to the transport and storage sector, despite the acute logistical and infrastructure challenges faced by these countries. The adoption of integrated national financing frameworks informed by national development cooperation policies can guide allocation of ODA and other forms of international development cooperation to better support country priorities and national sustainable development strategies.

Figure III.C.4
ODA by sector, on a cash basis, 2002-2022





Source: OECD Creditor Reporting System database.

The share of ODA commitments with gender equality objectives has declined following the COVID-19 crisis. Since 2011, the volume and share of DAC countries’ ODA commitments with gender equality as a policy objective had steadily increased, reaching $60 billion on average per year or 45 per cent of total bilateral allocable aid in 2019 – 2020 (figure III.C.6). However, while volumes have continued to increase, the share fell to 43 per cent 2021 – 2022, down from 45 per cent in 2019-20. By sector, the integration of gender equality is particularly weak in the humanitarian and energy sectors, despite evidence that integrating gender equality objectives in programming across every sector can strengthen the effectiveness and sustainability of interventions.  Amid an increase in competing needs, there are also growing risks of distortion, dilution and diversion of finance, which would affect both the quality and quantity of financing for gender equality. To address this, donor countries should intensify efforts to prioritize gender-focused ODA commitments and enhance gender policy safeguards. Leadership commitment by donors and well-designed adaptive programming are crucial in helping to advance ODA for gender equality. 


Figure III.C.6
Volume and share of ODA commitments with gender equality and women's empowerment as principal and significant policy objective, 2011-2022
(Billions of United States dollars, 2021 constant prices)

Source: OECD Creditor Reporting System database.

Amid a rapidly changing development finance landscape, there are multiple ongoing efforts to update and improve measurements of official support. In 2012, the OECD DAC began a process to modernize the way ODA is measured and reported. The main objectives of this process are to ensure the integrity and comparability of DAC members’ data on development finance, create the right incentive mechanisms for effective resource mobilisation and better reflect the changing development cooperation landscape. This includes the increasing significance of non-DAC providers, more diversified financial instruments, the importance of debt sustainability and the growing overlap between development policy objectives and other policy areas. The DAC clarified the eligibility rules for peace and security (2016) as well as in-donor refugee costs (2017) and migration-related activities (2022),  introduced the grant equivalent system for measuring ODA for a fairer reflection of actual efforts by donor countries and a more realistic comparison of grants and loans (2014), reached a consensus on the treatment of debt relief which introduced a hard ceiling equal to the nominal value of the original loan for debt relief of ODA claims (2020), and agreed on revised methods for treating PSI in ODA, which will become effective in 2024.   In parallel, there have also been efforts to develop a broader measure of cross-border resource flows beyond ODA, and support to the provision of global public goods, in total official support for sustainable development (TOSSD) (see Box III.C.1).

An important improvement to the SDG indicator framework was adopted in 2022 with a new indicator 17.3.1 on additional financial resources mobilized for developing countries from multiple sources, which includes a clear set of cascading sustainable development criteria to only count flows aligned with the SDGs. It contains 6 separate sub-indicators for data on a. Official sustainable development grants, b. Official concessional sustainable development loans, c. Official non-concessional sustainable development loans, d. Foreign direct investment, e. Mobilised private finance (MPF) on an experimental basis, and f. Private grants. UNCTAD and OECD as co-custodians have undertaken to ensure that there are no overlaps in global reporting for this indicator in cases where countries or multilaterals provide their information to both organizations.

Box III.C.1. Broader measures of development support 

Total official support for sustainable development

Initiated by the OECD and developed by an international task force of experts created in July 2017, total official support for sustainable development (TOSSD) aims to capture both cross-border resource flows to developing countries and support to international public goods and global challenges. It includes concessional and non-concessional support from traditional and emerging bilateral and multilateral finance providers, including South-South and triangular cooperation providers. It also captures private finance mobilized by official interventions. TOSSD data on 2022 flows was published in February 2024, covering activities from 119 respondents, including 58 countries and 61 multilateral organizations. Several pilot studies have also been conducted, including to ensure appropriate review of TOSSD data by developing countries.a TOSSD 2022 data includes activity-level information for $438 billion of official support and an additional $62 billion of private finance mobilized by official interventions.b TOSSD is one of the data sources for indicator 17.3.1. 

From 2024 onwards, the TOSSD standard will be governed by the International Forum on TOSSD (IFT) with a balanced representation of provider and recipient countries (including dual provider/recipients) and international organisations. Civil society organisations will have a permanent observer seat in all bodies of the IFT.c

a See the TOSSD website at https://tossd.org/pilot-studies-data-stories/ 
b TOSSD data available at https://tossd.online
c Terms of Reference of the International Forum on TOSSD available at https://tossd.org/docs/TORS_IFT_Oct_2023_final.pdf 

END BOX

Humanitarian finance 

Large-scale crises and emergencies have driven unprecedented humanitarian needs globally, but funding has not kept pace. Over the past two decades, financing requirements for the United Nations-coordinated humanitarian response plans have risen about thirty-fold, from $2 billion in 2000 to a record-high of $57 billion in 2023. The growth in humanitarian finance needs has accelerated in recent years due to the war in Ukraine, protracted armed conflicts, the global food crisis, the climate crisis and increasingly frequent disasters, as well as health epidemics (including COVID-19, Ebola, cholera, monkeypox). It is estimated that 300 million people worldwide are in need of humanitarian assistance in 2024, close to double the 168 million in 2019. With the rise in humanitarian needs far outpacing funding, the humanitarian financing gap has widened to its highest ever (figure III.C.7). In 2023, only one third of requested funding was received, with the first decline in funding in thirteen years. With competing pressures on aid budgets, there is a high risk that new emergencies will both remain underfunded and further divert resources away from longer-term development funding and support for existing crises, including in the African continent. This requires comprehensive action to reduce risk, address root causes and build resilience in humanitarian contexts.


Figure III.C.7
Humanitarian response plans: funding gap, 2000 – 2023
Billions of United States dollars 

Source: United Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA). 2023. “Appeals and Response Plans 2023”. Financial Tracking Service, accessed 15 January 2024.

Progress in strengthening the humanitarian financing model has been mixed. Given escalating needs and the evolving nature of crises, the international community has continued to explore new ways to improve the efficiency and effectiveness of humanitarian aid. Established in 2006, the United Nations Central Emergency Response Fund (CERF) remains a key instrument in funding very early responses to humanitarian emergencies. In 2016, Member States committed to doubling CERF’s annual funding target from $450 million to $1 billion, but contributions fall far short of the target, totalling $612 million in 2022. CERF funds now account for just over 1 per cent of global requirements, down from 9 per cent in 2007. The Contingency Fund for Emergencies (CFE) of the World Health Organization (WHO), which was set up in 2015, has provided rapid responses to disease outbreaks and health emergencies, including the COVID-19 pandemic. Substantial progress has been made in delivering commitments of the 2016 Grand Bargain and the reformulated 2021 Grand Bargain 2.0, including improvements in cash assistance coordination, more flexible and multi-year funding, improved joint needs analysis, and more harmonized reporting. However, challenges remain in other areas, including lack of progress in ensuring participation of affected people and limited direct funding to local and national actors. Another key issue is the phenomenon of de-banking, sometimes as a result of unintended consequences of anti-money laundering or countering the financing of terrorism standards, or international sanctions, which highly complicates the delivery of humanitarian services. Political will and collective action over the next phase of the Grand Bargain (2023-2026) are needed to accelerate improvements to the humanitarian finance landscape. Innovative measures to expand the humanitarian finance toolbox should also continue to be explored, as called for in the 2016 Agenda for Humanity. These could include scaling-up investments in pooled-funding mechanisms, like CERF, which can help simplify and expedite emergency responses. 

The most cost-effective actions to tackle growing humanitarian needs are preventative, such as investments in disaster risk reduction, peace, and security. Yet, insufficient attention is being paid towards prioritizing such investments. Despite the world experiencing the highest number of violent conflicts since 1945, DAC members’ spending on peacebuilding and conflict prevention in fragile contexts has declined to a fifteen-year low, accounting for 10.8 per cent ($5.27 billion) of its total ODA in 2021. Countries are recognizing the urgent need to shift away from reactive responses to crises towards scaling-up pre-arranged funding, such as through improved joint planning and systematically mainstreaming disaster risk reduction into the humanitarian system. At the same time, anticipatory financing remains limited, even when studies have shown that a large number of humanitarian crises are foreseeable.
 
Enhancing the coherence and complementarity between humanitarian assistance, development co-operation, and peace efforts in contexts affected by crises remains critical. The growing prevalence of protracted crises threatens to reverse gains in sustainable development, while blurring the line between humanitarian and development needs. In 2022, four out of five people in need of humanitarian assistance lived in countries experiencing protracted crisis. The New Deal for Engagement in Fragile States by the Group of Seven Plus, which was endorsed in 2011, laid out a first set of principles to guide development interventions in fragile or conflict-affected situations. In 2017, the United Nations Joint Steering Committee to Advance Humanitarian and Development Collaboration was established to ensure that humanitarian assistance efforts and longer-term sustainable development programmes are more coherent, with the objective to achieve collective outcomes to reduce need, risk and vulnerability. Addressing humanitarian needs and human rights necessitates investments in promoting sustainable development recognizing the pivotal role of resilience.
3.	The role of MDBs
MDBs are a critical source of affordable long-term finance to developing countries, as well as countercyclical support in times of crisis. The time-horizons of MDBs, as well as public development banks (PDBs), are longer than those of private investors, enabling them to provide long-term and concessional financing terms for investment that would otherwise not be competitive on a risk-return adjusted basis. MDBs deliver grants, concessional finance, and non-concessional finance at below-market rates, including for middle-income countries. MDBs have also provided vital countercyclical support to developing countries during crises, as evidenced by the sharp increase in disbursements following the global financial crisis in 2009 and the recent COVID-19 pandemic shock in 2020. 

The focus areas of MDB lending have evolved over the past few decades, amid a changing global landscape and more diverse set of development priorities. Historically and in line with their original mandates, the primary focus of many major MDBs, such as the World Bank’s IBRD and the ADB, was to provide financing for large-scale infrastructure projects. This broadened to include support for policies and programs to reduce poverty and strengthen health, education, and other human development programmes. In recent years, growing attention is also being paid align with sustainable development and the SDGs, and to consider how best to support global public goods, such as addressing climate challenges and pandemics.

Over the past two decades, MDB lending has grown significantly, though funding has become less concessional. Annual disbursements increasing from $30 billion in 2000 to $96 billion in 2022 (figure III.C.8). The establishment of two South-led multilateral financial institutions over the past decade have provided additional sources of infrastructure finance, while contributing to the strengthening of South-South cooperation (see section 6). While concessional finance as a share of total MDB lending to developing countries rose in the early 2000s, it has since declined from a peak of 35 per cent in 2004 to 13 per cent of total MDB lending in 2022. Similarly, the share of grants to the LDCs and SIDS has also declined from peaks seen in the 2000s. The trend may reflect the challenge to provide higher volumes of financing, with no associated increase in the volume of donor contributions, leading to less concessional resources.


Figure III.C.8
Lending by MDBs, 2000-2022
(Billions of United States dollars, current)

Source: World Bank, International Debt Statistics.

IDA remains the largest source of concessional financing. The World Bank’s International Development Association (IDA) remains the primary source of concessional financing for lower-income countries. The most recent replenishment of IDA (IDA20) was finalized in December 2021, with a record-high $93 billion financing package for fiscal years 2022 to 2025. In the face of multiple global shocks, however, the World Bank Board has emphasized the need for donor countries to further boost the availability of IDA resources going forward. Further measures to strengthen IDA’s medium- to long-term financing capacity were assessed at the December 2023 mid-term review of IDA20. At that time the next replenishment was launched, and IDA21 negotiations will continue through 2024.

Development banks are in a unique position to accelerate investments in sustainable development. Scaling up MDB resources and better aligning MDB operations with the SDGs is critical to meeting heightened demands. Relative to the size of the global economy and relative to needs, the financial capacity of MDBs remains limited: with the exception of the African Development Bank, paid-in capital bases of MDBs have not increased in line with the expansion of the global economy, or with growing investment needs (figure III.C.9). The Addis Ababa Action Agenda already stressed that development banks should make optimal use of their resources and balance sheets, consistent with maintaining their financial integrity. It also encouraged MDBs to update and develop their policies in support of the sustainable development agenda, and establish a process to examine their own scale, roles, and functions in order to adapt and better respond to the challenges in achieving the SDGs. Recent multiple global shocks, including the COVID-19 pandemic and the growing climate crisis, have increased the urgency of such a review. The G20’s Independent Review of MDBs’ Capital Adequacy Frameworks (CAF) laid out proposals for the MDBs to optimize the use of their resources and balance sheets. In addition, the SDG Stimulus , the Bridgetown Initiative, the Summit for a New Global Financial Pact, and other initiatives have recognized the potential for PDBs, in particular MDBs, to expand lending to meet the investment needs for sustainable development. 





Figure III.C.9
Paid-in capital as a share of world gross product, select MDBs, 1960-2022
Ratio

Source: United Nations calculations; updated from the UN Secretary-General’s SDG Stimulus. 

In response, MDBs are undertaking reforms to expand their financial capacity. Efforts to enhance financial capacity include capital management reforms, guarantee programs, and the issuance of hybrid capital (see table III.C.2 for an overview of measures taken by MDBs). World Bank shareholders agreed to a reform package boosting its lending capacity at its Annual Meetings in October in Marrakech, including through the creation of a portfolio guarantee mechanism, increasing the limits on bilateral guarantees, the launch of a hybrid capital instrument (including via channeling SDRs, see also below), and a lowering of IBRD’s minimum loan-to-equity ratio. Going forward the institution will look at ways to better utilize callable capital. In total, measures being implemented or under consideration across the MDBs could yield $300-$400 billion of additional lending capacity over the next decade.

Re-channelling of SDRs through MDBs has the potential to further expand lending capabilities, and is under active consideration. The African Development Bank jointly with the Inter-American Development Bank, has put forward an innovative proposal that allows countries to provide their SDRs as hybrid capital, which it can leverage to provide long-term financing for development and climate projects. The instrument would have a multiplier effect, leveraging SDRs by between three to four times, while maintaining the reserve asset status of SDRs. The MDBs are already prescribed holders of SDRs. In 2023, the IMF approved five new institutions to be prescribed holders, bringing the total number to twenty. While several major countries have expressed interest in channelling special drawing rights through MDBs, technical challenges remain. 

Table III.C.2 
Announced reform measures by major MDBs
Bank 
Increase lending capacity
Improve terms of lending
Align operations with SDGs
World Bank
- $157 billion increase over a decade through its Evolution process

- Eliminated the statutory lending limit

- IBRD lowered minimum equity-to-loan ratio from 20 per cent to 19 per cent
- Exploring longer-term loans with maturities of 35 to 40 years

- Implemented Climate Resilient Debt Clauses (CRDCs) for vulnerable countries

- IDA offers 50-year loans with 10-year grace periods
- Referenced SDG Stimulus in discussing reform ambitions

- Established a Co-Financing Platform for MDBs, to facilitate coordination across global and regional priorities
African Development Bank (AfDB)
- Aiming to increase funding by $1.5 to $4 billion over the next decade

- Launched the Alliance for Green Infrastructure in Africa in 2022
- Offering 50-year maturities with 10-year grace periods for ADF countries. in moderate risk of debt distress

Asian Development Bank (ADB)
- Set to provide $100 billion over the next decade



- Launched the Accelerating Climate Transitions through Green Finance initiative in Southeast Asia
Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank (AIIB)
- Introduced a new Guarantee Facility, along with the IBRD, providing $1 billion in guarantees

- Developed a new blended finance structure for green initiatives

- Discussed re-channeling Special Drawing Rights (SDRs) through MDBs and scaling up blended finance with SDG impact
European Bank for Reconstruction and Development (EBRD)
- Removed its statutory lending limit
- Expanded operations to sub-Saharan Africa and Iraq
- Launched the Climate Adaptation Plan in 2022
European Investment Bank (EIB)

- Established EIB Global for development beyond Europe

- Committed to channeling 50 per cent of its lending towards climate-related projects by 2025
Inter-American Development Bank (IADB)

- Since 2021, introduced Climate Resilient Debt Clauses to three countries

- Established new financing mechanisms rewarding countries for nature and climate objectives

- Published the IDB Group Climate Change Action Plan in 2021
New Development Bank

- Planning to issue 30 per cent of its loans in national currencies between 2022-2026, including South African rand and Indian rupee denominated bonds.

Sources: MDB websites, CGD MDB reform tracker. 

Amid mounting challenges to sustainable development, MDBs are also taking steps to better align their lending and business practices with the SDGs and climate action. For example, the World Bank has a new vision to create a world free of poverty on a livable planet. To this end, it will create a Livable Planet Fund by opening the Global Public Goods Fund to governments and philanthropies. Resources from the Livable Planet Fund will be used as part of the framework for providing financial incentives for investments in global public goods, including helping countries better navigate the long-term social and human capital investments and incentivize exiting from coal as part of energy transitions. A new Corporate Scorecard aligned with the new vision and mission of the World Bank has been endorsed by shareholders in December.  The World Bank has also expanded its Crisis Preparedness and Response Toolkit with fast access to cash for emergency response, scaled-up access to pre-arranged financing for emergency response, and expanded catastrophe insurance. 

Improving the terms of lending of MDBs, including through the provision of longer-term and local currency loans, can provide more breathing space for developing countries.  MDBs are also considering a range of reforms to adjust the terms of their lending. This includes the provision of ultra-long-term loans to allow time for investments to have an impact on economic growth and development, with the World Bank exploring loan maturities of 35 to 40 years to help countries better navigate long-term social and human capital investment. Increasing financing in local currency, such as done by the New Development Bank, can reduce the risk of debt distress arising from currency volatility, while contributing to the lowering of borrowers’ debt risk profile. At the same time, the inclusion of climate resilient debt clauses in loan contracts of MDBs, which is now being pioneered by several of them, would provide breathing space for countries hit by natural disasters or other exogenous shocks.  

Eligibility to MDB concessional windows is primarily based on income per capita, but MDBs have increasingly incorporated elements of vulnerability into access criteria. As of December 2022, 36 countries had graduated from IDA. Since IDA's founding, 46 countries have graduated, and ten of these graduates have since re-entered, or “reverse graduated” from IDA. While a country’s graduation process from IDA begins when its income per capita exceeds an operational cut-off ($1,314 in fiscal year 2024), several exceptions exist, reflecting an acknowledgement of the impact of vulnerability on development. The Small Island Economies Exception (SIEE),, which has been in place since 1985, allows IDA-eligible Small Island Economies (SIEs) continued access to IDA even with higher incomes.  In 2017, Small Economy Terms were extended to IDA-eligible non-island Small States, which benefited Bhutan, Djibouti, Guyana, and Timor-Leste. In 2019, the SIEE was further extended to IBRD SIEs based on vulnerability along with income and creditworthiness criteria, which benefited Fiji. An exceptional allowance was also made to Jordan and Lebanon in response to the Syrian refugee crisis. In 2024, the SIEE was further extended to qualifying IDA and IBRD non-island Small States, i.e., a broader Small States Exception, effective starting July 2024. Several regional development banks’ concessional facilities, including the ADB and the Caribbean Development Bank, also include exceptions that allow SIDS to access concessional funding even if they exceed income thresholds. Use of vulnerability measures to inform allocations of concessional finance, , could provide much-needed support to vulnerable countries, such as the SIDS.

Closer cooperation across MDBs and PDBs can strengthen the entire development bank system and deliver greater impact. At the Marrakech meetings, 10 MDBs signed an agreement aimed toward better coordination and cooperation, covering five areas: scaling up financing capacity including use of hybrid capital and portfolio guarantees, while stepping up their joint approach to credit rating agencies; boosting efforts on climate and better tracking of outcomes beyond the current joint climate finance reporting; enhancing country-level cooperation; strengthening co-financing, including by standardizing processes; and joint mechanisms to mobilize private capital. In parallel to the MDB system, PDBs, including national development  banks, have a large footprint, with about 526 development banks and development finance institutions managing assets of $23 trillion. The importance of cooperation among   the broader ecosystem of PDBs is increasingly recognized, with PDBs at the inaugural Finance in Common (FiC) Summit signing a joint declaration, committing to implementing a roadmap to improve the sustainability of their financing and to achieve collective results at scale. 

4.	Blended finance and mobilized private finance
The amounts mobilised from the FF sector by blended finance activities from the official sector have grown steadily over the last decade. However, these amounts remain far below expectations.  The potential for blended finance as an innovative solution to finance sustainable development, as well as principles for its use, was a main focus of the Addis Ababa Action Agenda in 2015. The main objective of blended finance, which involves the use of public development finance to crowd in additional finance, notably private finance, is to incentivize private sector investment in areas or projects that would otherwise not have been competitive with other investment opportunities, in support of national development priorities and the SDGs. Between 2012 and 2022, total private finance mobilized by bilateral and multilateral development finance providers grew at an average of 12.55 per cent annually, to reach $61.5 billion in 2022 (figure III.C.10), . Of the total mobilized, 55.5 per cent targeted the energy and banking sectors, while 5.6 per cent went to projects in social sectors  (figure III.C.11). The lower share of blended finance in social sectors largely reflects the lack of a commercially viable financial return in many social sector transactions.


Figure III.C.10
Amounts mobilized from the private sector by official development finance interventions, 2012-2021
Billions of United States dollars, current

Source: OECD. 

Figure III.C.11 
Mobilized private finance by sector, 2019 – 2021 average
Billions of United States dollars, current

Source: OECD. 

The expansion of blended finance has slowed in recent years, constrained by the challenging global macroeconomic context, with some estimates suggesting that deal volume halved in 2022. Convergence, a global network for blended finance, highlighted that the increase in global interest rates have constrained the balance sheets of many global banks, which are a critical source of debt capital in blended finance. Mounting debt burdens, high inflation, and rising geopolitical uncertainty, have also contributed to the deterioration in investor risk appetite, leading to a decline in the availability of affordable capital in the emerging market economies.  Amidst these challenging macro-circumstances, the total volume of blended finance deals is estimated to have fallen by nearly half in 2022 compared to the previous year.  

Only a small proportion of private finance has been channelled to the LDCs. MICs attract most blended finance deals. Only about 15 per cent of private finance mobilized between 2018 and 2020 went to the LDCs, and through only a small number of large-scale projects. The low proportion of deals in LDCs reflects the fact that blended finance, like private finance, is drawn to areas with lower barriers to private capital mobilization. It can also indicate a tendency of blended finance to focus on less costly projects with lower-risk profiles, with projects LDCs often characterized by less attractive risk-return pofiles, and potentially lower developmental impacts. In this aspect, the Task Force has stressed that for blended finance to be applicable to LDCs, there must be a switch from a search for bankability to a search for quality and impact. 

A new approach to blended finance is needed in order to realise its potential to meet the growing demand for development support. As highlighted in earlier Financing for Sustainable Development Reports, the Addis Ababa Action Agenda sets several guiding principles for blended finance, which should be central in efforts to scale up blended finance. Among these principles include: first, blending needs to be aligned with country priorities and be part of broader national sustainable development strategies. Second, the primary focus of all blended deals should be development impact rather than quantity or degree of leverage. Third, analysis should always include measurement of the cost of blending versus other financing mechanisms as well as ensure that the public sector is not overcompensating private partners. In addition, different groups of actors have defined principles for blending for their own activities, including the 2017 OECD/DAC Blended Finance Principles for Unlocking Commercial Finance for the SDGs, and the 2017 DFI Working Group Enhanced Blended Concessional Finance Principles. The 2021 OECD-UNDP Impact Standards for Financing Sustainable Development, a guide and self-assessment tool, could help increase SDG impact of investments, including through improved monitoring and transparency. 
5.	South-South cooperation 
The evolution of SSC initiatives has been marked by a growing recognition of its transformative potential. The history of South-South Cooperation (SSC) dates back over seventy years, marked by the establishment of the first UN technical aid programme by the Economic and Social Council in 1949. Since then, SSC has evolved significantly, including through the adoption of the Buenos Aires Plan of Action (BAPA) for Promoting and Implementing Technical Cooperation among Developing Countries in 1978 and the establishment of the United Nations Office for South-South Cooperation in 2013. Another milestone was set at the High-level United Nations Conference on South-South Cooperation in 2009, which highlighted the crucial roles that national governments, regional entities and UN agencies play in supporting and implementing SSC and triangular cooperation. Following the adoption of the 2030 Agenda, this commitment was reaffirmed at the second High-level United Nations Conference on South-South Cooperation (BAPA+40) in 2019, which emphasized the significance of SSC in accelerating progress towards sustainable development. 

SSC has expanded in scope, volume, and geographical reach. SSC has evolved substantially over the years to include a more diverse range of both governmental and non-governmental actors, while encompassing a larger number of developing countries. SSC has proven to be a valuable complement to North-South cooperation across both financial and non-financial areas of development cooperation. This was evident during the recent COVID-19 pandemic, when a wide range of SSC initiatives supported developing countries, including through providing finance, humanitarian relief, and medical supplies. There have also been growing efforts to measure South-South cooperation flows in a comparable manner which have now led to the development of the voluntary Framework to measure South-South cooperation, developed and agreed upon by the countries of the global South, to reflect the rich modalities of South-South cooperation, and welcomed by all United Nations member States.

South-led development banks have enhanced the availability of financial resources for long-term investments in developing countries. In 2015, two new South-led multilateral financial institutions were established with the primary objective of mobilizing resources for infrastructure and sustainable development, namely the New Development Bank (NDB) and the Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank (AIIB). In tandem with growing operations and member countries, the balance sheets of both banks have expanded consistently over the past few years. For the NDB, total assets have increased from $10 billion in 2017 to $26 billion in 2022, with total loans of $33 billion to more than 96 projects. To enhance its development impact, the NDB is not only expanding its membership, but has also committed to more financing in local currency loans. Meanwhile total assets of the AIIB have increased from $18 billion in 2017 to $47 billion in 2022.As of end-2023, the AIIB has approved a total of 251 projects with financing of over $50 billion, benefitting many MICs, LDCs, SIDS and LLDCs. At the same time, lending by regional and subregional development banks, such as those in Latin America and Africa, continue to play an important complementary role to multilateral institutions, as their regional knowledge enables them to likely be more effective in responding to regional needs and demands. 

The development of a United Nations Conceptual Framework to Measure South-South Cooperation marks a breakthrough in the measurement of SSC, allowing for the quantification of both financial and non-financial dimensions. Variations in approaches, modalities, and instruments of SSC across countries have made it challenging to develop a common definition and to quantify global trends of SSC flows. Progress in SSC measurement reached a milestone in 2021, when a voluntary Conceptual Framework was developed by a subgroup on South-South cooperation as part of the Inter-agency Expert Group on SDG Indicators Working Group on Measurement of Development Support. This Framework would inform SDG indicator 17.3.1, on “additional financial resources mobilized for developing countries from multiple sources”, which was adopted by the United Nations Statistical Commission in 2022. The Commission also welcomed this Framework and requested that it be enabled by the co-custodianship of the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development (UNCTAD) and led by countries from the global South.  In 2023, UNCTAD, in collaboration with the United Nations Regional Commissions and other United Nations entities, launched a capacity development project to test the Framework in eight pilot countries in Africa, Asia and Latin America.  The project is intended to strengthen national coordination on data collection, while generating feedback on the feasibility and challenges of measuring financial and non-financial forms of SSC by applying the Framework in these countries.  In 2023, the Islamic Development Bank (IsDB) launched its South-South Cooperation Index, a composite measure to assess the existence, effectiveness, and growth of the elements of national SSC ecosystems of a country. Other innovative tools to measure SSC, including measurement of its effectiveness, are also being developed (Box III.C.2).

There is also a subset of Southern providers that report to the OECD: over the past two decades, development assistance flows from the nineteen non-DAC countries that report to the OECD has risen from $1.1 billion in 2000 to $17.7 billion in 2022. In recent years, a few developing countries, including Türkiye and the United Arab Emirates, have provided ODA of more than 0.7 per cent of their GNI. Arab providers account for almost half of non-DAC reported development assistance, with flows directed mainly through grants to the Middle East and North African region. As another major effort, China’s Belt and Road Initiative (BRI) has expanded to include over 150 countries across Asia, Latin America, Africa, and parts of Europe, since its launch in 2013. With the primary objective of boosting global connectivity and trade through infrastructure development, the BRI has established over 3,000 cooperation projects and generated nearly a trillion dollars in investments.   In 2021, China launched the Global Development Initiative with the aim of revitalizing global development partnerships for the SDGs as well as to foster synergies though SSC. 

Box III.C.2
Innovative tool to measure the effectiveness of South-South Cooperation 

Between 2020 - 2022, Colombia, a member of the Steering Committee of the Global Partnership for Effective Development Co-operation (GPEDC), led the development of a Self-Assessment Framework on the Effectiveness of its South-South Cooperation (SSC). With support from Switzerland and UNDP, the tool has been piloted in seven countries, namely Bangladesh, Cabo Verde, Colombia, El Salvador, Indonesia, Kenya, and Mexico. 
The tool utilizes responses to 61 questions to construct a multi-dimensional index of SSC effectiveness. Efforts to develop this tool involved the comparison of internationally-agreed principles of effective development cooperation and those of SSC, as summarized in the 2016 UN Framework of Operational Guidelines on United Nations Support to South-South and Triangular Cooperation,a as well as identifying common ideas between both spaces. It aims to contribute to the design and characterization of a more robust methodology to measure the effectiveness of SSC, as well as to provide insights into how a country manages the effectiveness of its SSC and to identify areas for potential improvement. b 

In the results, country ownership was found to be the most well-applied principle among respondents, potentially explained by the highly demand-driven nature of SSC.c The results, however, also revealed that ownership is interpreted as National Government-centric, with opportunities for improvement through consultations with local governments in areas where SSC activities are carried out, and with non-public stakeholders. The use of Data Governance Frameworks to standardize the use of data for informing SSC-related policy was identified as a key challenge, as only one out of the seven pilot countries has a Data Governance Framework finalized and in use.  
Colombia and Indonesia are currently leading efforts to further refine the tool, and expand its application and uptake in other countries, including in the Africa, Asia, Latin America and the Caribbean regions, in conjunction with the roll out of the 4th monitoring round of the GPEDC. 

a https://digitallibrary.un.org/record/826679?ln=en 
bhttps://www.effectivecooperation.org/system/files/2023-05/Thematic%20Initiatives%20-%20SSC%20Self%20Assessment%20%28EN%29.pdf 
c https://www.effectivecooperation.org/SSC-Pilot-Self-Assessment-Summary-Report
End Box

Triangular cooperation is an important link between South-South and North-South cooperation. According to data compiled by the OECD, although triangular cooperation still constitutes a small share of development finance flows, its volume and usage has grown significantly over the past two decades. The largest share of triangular cooperation is with partners in the Latin America and the Caribbean region, and there has been a visible rise in its usage in sub-Saharan Africa and the Asia-Pacific region since 2018. While triangular cooperation is used across a range of sectors, most partners use it as an experience and knowledge-sharing instrument, particularly on how to support the government and civil society. The involvement of multiple partners may sometimes create coordination challenges, leading to higher implementation costs. To better assess the evolution of triangular cooperation and its effectiveness, there is a need for all partners to improve the monitoring and reporting of its use at the national level, and to encourage better monitoring at the regional and global level. 

The United Nations system continues to support South-South and triangular cooperation. Most United Nations entities are mainstreaming SSC and triangular cooperation as implementation modalities towards realizing the SDGs. In 2022, 73 per cent of United Nations entities reported integrating South-South and triangular cooperation into their global strategic plans.  Many United Nations entities are also enhancing efforts to strengthen knowledge sharing, codify good practices, and broker South-South partnerships. For example, the “South-South Galaxy” platform, coordinated by the United Nations Office for South-South Cooperation (UNOSSC), promotes knowledge-sharing and partnership development, including through connecting Southern partners with financing mechanisms. The new United Nations Framework to Measure South-South Cooperation for SDG indicator 17.3.1 has started bringing UN entities together to support member States in their efforts to quantify SSC. The Development Cooperation Forum (DCF) knowledge platform provides an interactive platform for South-South Cooperation among member states on more than 12 topics regarding development cooperation, supporting discussion forums, initiatives, experiences, and national policies. Through regional agreements, the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) supports countries in the Global South in building capacities to apply nuclear technologies and techniques in several areas, including agrifood systems and energy. 
6.	Finance for climate change and biodiversity 
Mobilization of climate finance falls short of what is needed to effectively address the scale of climate challenges and remains grossly inadequate for the most vulnerable countries. There are large investment gaps in climate change mitigation and adaptation as well as in disaster risk reduction; lack of investment in climate action is threatening to become a vicious circle in many countries, as limited resources prevent countries from investing in resilience, in turn making them more vulnerable to climate shocks. Both public and private financing will be needed to close these investment gaps, not least significant concessional public finance for vulnerable developing countries. At the 2009 United Nations Climate Change Conference in Denmark (COP15), developed countries agreed to jointly provide and mobilize $100 billion a year by 2020 to support climate action in developing countries. While climate finance has grown significantly over time, the target is yet to be met. The latest OECD assessment of progress showed that climate finance provided and mobilised amounted to $89.6 billion in 2021, an increase of over 70 per cent compared to 2013 (fig III.C.12). 

While public climate finance has increased strongly over the past decade, private finance mobilized continues to be significantly lower in recent years, particularly on climate adaptation investments. This is despite growing interest in sustainable investing by the private sector. At the same time, climate finance channelled to the countries most vulnerable to climate change remains grossly insufficient. Of the total climate finance mobilized between 2016 and 2021, only 17 per cent was channelled to the LDCs and 3 per cent to SIDS. 

The growing impacts of climate change underscore the importance of more ambitious climate finance goals and national commitments. At the 2023 United Nations Climate Change Conference in Dubai (COP28), countries concluded the first “global stocktake” of progress made on climate action since the Paris Agreement. The stocktake noted that the amount of climate finance remains insufficient despite growing financial pledges for climate action, including a record $12.8 billion for the second replenishment of the Green Climate Fund (GCF). Amid intensifying climate challenges, the stocktake stressed the urgent need to raise ambitions and accelerate implementation of climate action across all areas. Furthermore, in 2015, countries agreed that prior to 2025, they would set a New Collective Quantified Goal (NCQG), raising the climate finance target from a floor of $100 billion per year, accounting for the needs and priorities of developing countries. The discussions on the NCQG will conclude at COP29 at the end of 2024.


Figure III.C.12
Climate finance provided and mobilized by developed countries for developing countries, 2013 – 2021
United States dollars, billions 

Source: Based on Biennial Reports to the UNFCCC, OECD Development Assistance Committee and Export Credit Group statistics, as well as complementary reporting to the OECD. 

The global climate finance architecture has become increasingly complex and fragmented. There has been a proliferation of climate funds over the past two decades. As of end-2022, there are an estimated 81 active climate funds, which include 62 multilateral funds and the rest comprising of bilateral, regional, and national funds. While each individual fund was established with a separate purpose, as a whole, they are contributing to a fragmented aid landscape, with different implementing agencies and bureaucratic processes. This has not only created monitoring and reporting challenges, but has also made coordination and access to finance more difficult for developing countries, especially LDCs and SIDS. As the urgency to ramp up climate investments grows, so have calls for reforms to enhance the coherence and effectiveness of the global climate finance architecture. Proposals include shorter-term measures such as improving coordination and specialization of funds, and longer-term strategies which include the consolidation of disperse funds to create mechanisms at scale. 

Adaptation finance gap is widening. Although adaptation finance has increased over the past decade, it has not kept pace with growing climate risks. Despite pledges made at COP26 to double adaptation finance by 2025, adaptation finance has recently been falling: bilateral adaptation-related ODA reached USD 27 billion in 2021, according to data provided by OECD DAC members. This marked a decrease from the USD 30 billion reported in 2020 (though an increase over the 2019 volume of USD 20 billion).. At the same time, estimates of adaptation costs have risen significantly and are expected to increase further amid accelerating climate impacts. Against this backdrop, the adaptation finance gap has widened to its highest ever, with adaptation needs estimated at 10 – 18 times greater than finance flows. Bridging this gap requires more than just an increase in public resources, but also, where possible, greater private finance. To attract more private capital to adaptation activities, new and innovative instruments and mechanisms are being explored (see also Box III.C.3 on broader discussions on innovative financing). These include the AfDB’s Adaptation Benefits Mechanism which aims to share risks and incentivize investments in adaptation.


Box III.C.2
Innovative development finance 

The potential for innovative finance to enhance development cooperation was first recognized in the Monterrey Consensus of 2002. Shortly thereafter, the Leading Group on Innovative Financing for Development was established with the aim of promoting innovative solutions for financing for development across various areas, including health, poverty eradication, food security, and climate change. While no agreed definition exists, innovative financing for development has often been understood to include sources and mechanisms that raise additional funding for sustainable development on top of conventional ODA.a  

While there have been some successes in innovative financing, particularly early in the period, overall uptake has remained limited. Earlier discussions were focused on solidarity taxes, which were successfully used in funding UNITAID (to address HIV/AIDS, tuberculosis, and malaria). Other measures to better manage aid flows have also been introduced, such as ODA securitization and advanced market commitments for funding vaccines (most recently for COVID-19 vaccines). As noted in the Addis Agenda, these earlier innovative instruments still have the potential to be replicated and scaled up. 

The series of global shocks over the past few years have reignited interest in the innovative public finance agenda, in particular to scale-up financing of global public goods, including for health and climate action.  Following the success of COVAX, the multilateral mechanism for equitable global access to COVID-19 vaccines, there have been growing discussions to enhance future pandemic preparedness, including through the establishment of a pandemic vaccine pool.b At the 2023 United Nations Climate Change Conference in Dubai (COP 28), a group of international organizations and development finance institutions announced plans to boost innovative financial instruments for sustainable climate and nature-linked sovereign financing. c Other recent innovative finance proposals include imposing a levy on shipping emissions, taxes on extreme wealth d  and a facility to support food imports for countries most exposed to surging food prices.e

a https://www.diplomatie.gouv.fr/IMG/pdf/2021_12_-_leading_groupe_innovative_financing_en__web2_cle85adb2.pdf 
b https://reliefweb.int/report/world/world-leaders-commit-us48-billion-help-break-covid-now
c https://www.iadb.org/en/news/eight-international-organizations-and-development-finance-institutions-join-forces-boost 
d https://www.theguardian.com/business/2023/jan/18/tax-us-now-ultra-rich-wealth-tax-davos 
e Responding to soaring food import costs and addressing the needs of the most exposed (fao.org)
End Box

MDBs play a stronger role in funding climate action, but shareholders need to ensure that funding for mitigation in particular is additional. In response to the growing urgency to scale up climate finance, MDBs are raising their climate ambitions, including to deliver higher adaptation finance. In recent years, MDBs’ provision of climate finance has surpassed their targets set in 2019, with financing for low and middle-income countries reaching a record $61 billion in 2022. A few MDBs, including the World Bank and the Asian Development Bank, recently revised their climate finance commitments to above their post-2020 targets. In addition to increasing financial flows, there is also an opportunity for MDBs to improve how these funds are programmed and disbursed. Climate and debt-vulnerable countries, such as the LDCs and SIDS, need more concessional resources and grants. The MDBs launched the Joint Methodological Principles for Assessment of Paris Agreement Alignment in June 2023 and have been implementing this framework for aligning their operations to the goals of the Paris Agreement. This includes working together to strengthen the global response to the threat of climate change, in the context of sustainable development and efforts to eradicate poverty, by keeping global warming well below 2°C above pre-industrial levels and pursuing efforts to stay below 1.5°C; fostering adaptation, resilience and low-emissions development without threatening food production; and making finance flows consistent with a pathway toward low-emissions, climate-resilient development. There is also a need for the MDBs to develop mechanisms to better account for climate finance to ensure that increasing financing for climate action does not come at the expense of development finance for other priorities. 

Global climate finance discussions reached an important breakthrough at the end of 2023, with the creation of the Loss and Damage Fund. Loss and damage first appeared in negotiated outcomes as part of the Bali Action Plan in 2007, but discussions only gained momentum from 2013 onwards. In 2022, the United Nations Climate Change Conference in Sharm el-Sheikh (COP27) decided to establish a Loss and Damage Fund to support vulnerable countries in addressing the escalating effects of climate change. The creation of the Fund reflects the growing recognition that developed countries majorly historically responsible for climate change should provide support to developing countries in dealing with irreversible losses and costly damages due to climate disasters. At the recently concluded COP28, governments pledged around $700 million to the Fund, which will be hosted at the World Bank on an interim basis. In light of the size of climate-related losses, which have been estimated at around $400 billion a year by 2030 for developing countries, more financial commitments from developed countries will be crucial, as will be the mobilization of other sources of financing, including private finance. For the Fund to be effective, its efforts should also be coordinated with existing climate adaptation and mitigation initiatives, to help close gaps in the current architecture and ensure complementarity and a more holistic approach.   
Biodiversity finance 

Biodiversity loss is a threat to human well-being and sustainable development. The unprecedented decline in biodiversity and environmental degradation poses systemic risks to a large number of social and economic goals. Over half of the world’s GDP is moderately or highly dependent on nature, thus exposed to the risks posed by biodiversity loss. 

The international community must mobilize more financial resources to halt and reverse the decline in nature. The Addis Agenda contained a range of commitments to protect ecosystems, including one that encourages the mobilization of financial resources to conserve and sustainably use biodiversity and ecosystems. This was consistent with the Strategic Plan for Biodiversity 2011-2020 and its Aichi Targets of the Convention on Biological Diversity (CBD). The latest progress report showed however that at the global level none of the twenty targets had been fully achieved, though six targets have been partially achieved, including Target 20 on resource mobilisation.  ODA for biodiversity-related objectives more than doubled over the period of the Strategic Plan for Biodiversity, from $5.4 billion in 2011 to $11.1 billion in 2021, but the broader biodiversity financing gap remains large. 

In follow-up to the Strategic Plan, the Kunming-Montreal Global Biodiversity Framework was adopted in December 2022, marking a historic agreement that lays out a set of ambitious goals and targets to address the rapid loss of biodiversity. These targets include the repurposing of $500 billion per year in harmful subsidies, mobilizing at least $200 billion per year for biodiversity-related funding, and raising international financial resources to developing countries, in particular the LDCs and SIDS, to at least $30 billion per year. To support the implementation of this framework, the Global Biodiversity Framework Fund (GBF) was launched in 2023, with Canada and the United Kingdom providing initial contributions for its capitalization. The GBF, which is now operational, forms part of the Global Environment Facility (GEF), which is the main financing mechanism of the CBD. Since its inception in 1991, the GEF has delivered nearly $22 billion in grants and mobilized another $119 billion in co-financing. In 2022, the GEF finalized a record $5.3 billion in pledges for its eighth replenishment round, with biodiversity protection as the largest component of its new programming period. 

Despite their potential to tackle the climate crisis and biodiversity loss, the implementation of Nature-based Solutions (NbS) is hindered by financing and capacity constraints. The International Union for the Conservation of Nature defines NbS as actions that address societal challenges through the protection, sustainable management, and restoration of ecosystems, benefiting biodiversity and human well-being. Financing for NbS currently stands at around $200 billion per year, accounting for only a third of levels needed to achieve climate, biodiversity, and land degradation targets by 2030. The public sector continues to provide the bulk of funding for NbS, with private capital constituting 17 per cent of investments in NbS. There are several barriers to unlocking private finance for NbS. NbS projects often do not offer financial returns competitive on a risk-return basis with other investment opportunities, with much of the investment to date through philanthropy of impact investors. In addition, there is an absence of a consistent methodology to track NbS financing to gauge impact. In 2023, a new database that matches biodiversity-related projects with public and private funders was launched, which could facilitate a more effective mobilization of resources for biodiversity conservation and restoration.  
7.	Quality, impact and effectiveness of development cooperation 
Effective development cooperation must once again become a central focus of financing discussions to address massive global development challenges in a changing financing landscape. The importance of effective development cooperation was first recognized in the Monterrey Consensus, which called not only for a substantial increase in ODA and other resources for development, but also for enhanced effectiveness of development cooperation. In the years after Monterrey, this agenda was discussed and strengthened through the United Nations Development Cooperation Forum (DCF), which was created in the 2005 World Summit, first held in 2007. Since then, the DCF meets biennially to review trends, progress and emerging issues in international development cooperation and promote coherence and coordination amongst diverse actors and activities. The Addis Ababa Action Agenda in 2015 recognized the need for continued efforts to improve the quality, impact and effectiveness of development cooperation through the DCF, taking account of efforts in other relevant forums, such as the Global Partnership for Effective Development Cooperation (GPEDC), in a complementary manner. The GPEDC, a multi-stakeholder platform that supports evidence-based dialogue and action on effective development co-operation through a global monitoring exercise, emerged from the aid effectiveness process, including the 2005 Paris Declaration on Aid Effectiveness, the 2008 Accra Agenda for Action and the Busan Partnership for Effective Development Cooperation in 2011. Monitoring by and discussions in these two different platforms dealing with international development cooperation reveal that progress in implementing these commitments has been mixed, and the need for reform and revitalization of this agenda.

Global progress in improving quality, impact and effectiveness of development cooperation has been mixed since the adoption of the Addis Agenda. In the Addis Ababa Action Agenda, Member States agreed to align development cooperation activities with national priorities, including by reducing fragmentation and accelerating untying of aid, particularly for least developed countries and countries most in need. However, a 2021 survey on the quality of ODA showed that ten years after the initiation of the Busan Partnership for Effective Development Co-operation and six years after the Addis Agenda, progress has been mixed. 

Countries are taking steps towards strengthening their enablers of development cooperation but development partners’ alignment with them has been declining. A key factor in improving the quality, effectiveness and impact of international development cooperation is the strengthening of country ownership, guided by coherent national development cooperation policies (NDCPs), country results frameworks (CRFs), development cooperation information systems (DCIS) and national development cooperation forums (NDCFs). Since the adoption of the Addis Ababa Action Agenda, developing country governments have made some progress in these areas. For example, 82 per cent of 2022 DCF Survey respondents reported the adoption of NDCPs (up from 72% in 2016) and highlighted their role in mobilizing and aligning not only ODA but also other modalities of international development cooperation. Over the same time period, countries reported engaging an increasingly diverse range of development cooperation modalities and actors.  Yet, before the COVID-19 pandemic, development partners’ alignment to partner country priorities and country-owned results frameworks had been declining. Less than half of ODA is channelled through the public sector of recipient developing countries, and only one third in the LDCs (figure III.C.13).  

Figure III.C.13
Gross bilateral ODA disbursements by channel
Percentage of total 

Source: OECD Creditor Reporting System database.

While there has been some progress in untying aid (see below), development partners’ alignment to partner country priorities and country-owned results frameworks and country PFM systems has declined. Indeed, a broader perspective on all public and private sector financing to developing countries reveals a proliferation of official finance providers and implementing entities and the continued fragmentation of development activities, adding to complexity of the architecture and increased transaction costs for developing countries (see Box III.C.4).

Box III.C.4
Aid architecture changes and recipient country burdens

By complementing data reported by official donors to the OECD Development Assistance Committee (DAC) and Creditor Reporting System (CRS) with data reported by recipient governments to the World Bank Debtor Reporting System (DRS), World Bank research on aid architecture broadens the focus from official development assistance (ODA) to all public and private sector financing to developing countries. 

As Official Financial Flows (OFF) to developing countries have more than tripled over the past two decades, with the sharpest increase occurring in 2020 in the wake of the pandemic, so too have the proliferation of official finance providers and implementing entities and the continued fragmentation of development activities. All of this has added to the complexity of the global aid architecture, increased transaction costs for developing countries, and impacted aid effectiveness.

Funds increasingly circumvent recipient government budgets, creating a significant coordination challenge for recipient governments. Today, three out of every four OFF transactions are implemented by other entities (e.g., NGOs, donor government entities, and multilateral institutions) and half these funds bypass recipient country budgets, undermining effectiveness. 

An increasing number of donor-funded activities of decreasing size has resulted in fragmentation.  The average ODA grant fell from $1.5m in 2000 to $0.8m in 2019, taxing the capacity of recipients. Pooled funding has been a recognized solution to reduce the impact of aid fragmentation, but its uptake is low. Instead, there is a proliferation of donors, with an increasing number of entities providing development finance: the number of donors doubled (from 47 to 70) and bilateral and multilateral donor agencies tripled (from 191 to 502). For instance, during 2020, Ethiopia, Mozambique, and Nepal had to engage with 204, 172 and 154 donor agencies respectively.   

In addition, there has been a significant shift in the allocation of aid towards facilities dedicated to specific sectors or themes. The so-called vertical funds now provide developing countries with a greater volume of ODA grants than Multilateral Development Banks (MDBs). Yet bilateral ODA channeled through horizontal platforms leverage far more resources for development than vertical platforms (leverage ratio for horizontal platforms was 1.7 in 2011-2019, jumping to 3 in 2020, compared to 0.6 for vertical platforms).  With limited exceptions, vertical funds use donor contributions directly as grants and only a small number of them generate new capital for development purposes or income transfers.  

Source: World Bank, based on A Changing Landscape: Trends in Official Financial Flows and the Aid Architecture (September 2021) and Understanding Trends in Proliferation and Fragmentation fir Aid Effectiveness during Crises (July 2022).

End Box

Progress in untying aid has been uneven. Untying aid helps to strengthen country ownership, and can lead to the strengthening of local economies by allowing for local procurement. Over the past two decades, the share of untied ODA has increased from an average of 47 per cent in 1999 – 2001 to 89 per cent in 2022.  In 2018, the DAC broadened the country coverage of the 2001 DAC Recommendation to Untie ODA to include other low-income countries and IDA-only countries, in addition to the already covered LDCs and Heavily Indebted Poor Countries (HIPC).  However, several challenges to further progress on untying aid persist. Many countries and key ODA sectors, such as technical co-operation and food aid, remain excluded. Moreover, “informally tied aid” remains an issue, amid high barriers to entry for developing country suppliers. More than half of the value of contracts awarded in countries included in the DAC Recommendation continue to go to suppliers in DAC provider countries. While developing countries were awarded 44 per cent of the total number of contracts, these contracts represented only 13 per cent of the total value of the contracts.  Development partners must take urgent action to identify and remove barriers that hinder local producers, including in the LDCs, so that they can reap a “double dividend” in addressing poverty and inequalities, while building up local economies. In this regard, the Development Assistance Committee (DAC) is currently reviewing the Recommendation to explore whether it could encourage greater procurement by and from local organisations and businesses in developing partner countries as policy levers to advance their sustainable development and ownership, and, if so, how.

