Chapter II. Financing Sustainable Development in an Era of Transformative Digital Technologies 
1. Introduction 
Digital technologies have come into much sharper focus since 2015, impacting the main areas of finance and development highlighted in the Addis Ababa Action Agenda: (i) financial markets; (ii) public finance; and (iii) development pathways (trade and investment). 
Digital technologies create tremendous opportunity for achieving a more sustainable financial system that supports the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs). The promise of digital technologies is clear: they can enable inclusion and wider access to products and services and increase efficiencies, particularly in the financial sector and in public financial management. They can also strengthen societal resilience to crises. During the COVID-19 outbreak, digital communication tools help sustain human interaction and continuity in some vital economic activities, although many developing countries do not have such capacities, putting them at a disadvantage. 
But like similar transitions in previous eras, rapid technological change also causes “growing pains” and the emergence of new risks. How quickly and effectively policies and regulatory frameworks adjust will determine their contribution to sustainable development. 
Our current institutions and policy frameworks are often ill equipped to address new risks such as the growing dominance and market power of big tech firms across sectors and national borders. In some sectors and countries (e.g., payments in China, financial inclusion in East Africa), digital technologies are causing rapid and dramatic change; in others, impacts are much more gradual or uncertain. How frontier digital technologies will evolve over the next ten years, and how they will affect inequality, jobs, and development pathways, remains unclear.
No country, and no financing and economic policy domain, will remain entirely unaffected. While policy solutions will always be context specific and depend on a country’s unique circumstances, all countries must get ready today to be prepared for an increasingly digital economy of tomorrow. This thematic chapter of the Financing for Sustainable Development Report 2020 presents policy options across all action areas of the Addis Agenda to harness the potential of digital technologies for the benefit of people, ensuring that gains are shared widely and risks are managed carefully, and that national actions are supported by collective global measures. 
Several key recommendations emerge from the analysis in this report:
• Take a strategic approach to digital finance to provide a common frame of reference for all actors. This can take different forms—as part of a science, technology and innovation (STI) strategy or road map, a dedicated digital economy strategy, or explicit integration of digital technologies in the broader planning process (e.g., embedded in a country’s integrated national financing framework); 
• Put basic building blocks in place today to participate in the digital economy, including (i) prerequisite infrastructure; (ii) digital skills; and (iii) updated enabling regulatory and policy environments; 
• Revisit policy frameworks and the regulatory architecture to respond to the cross-cutting and wide-ranging effects of digital technologies on financing. Silo-style regulation will not be viable when digital technologies, information and communications technology (ICT), data, finance, and other sectors interact in myriad ways; 
• Maintain a level playing field to ensure that the entry of players that harness the power of big data leads to innovation and diversification rather than market domination (e.g., big tech in the financial sector). Digital technologies should benefit people not just as consumers, but also in their role as producers and workers; 
• Identify labour-intensive development pathways to avoid incentivizing digital technologies that are labour-replacing when unemployment is a major policy challenge. Preparing for the digital age can be pursued in parallel to supporting more labour-intensive development pathways, in a two-pronged approach; 
• Step up global collaboration on digital technologies and finance to create spaces for peer learning among policymakers and regulators, to strengthen capacity support, and to facilitate coordinated responses, such as global guidelines and standards.
The next section of this chapter lays out the challenges and opportunities that digital technologies create for sustainable development. It traces these to the unique properties of digital technologies (an almost costless flow of unprecedented amounts of data, which lowers transaction costs and can help overcome inefficiencies linked to information failure) and describes their impacts on financial and product markets. The third section puts forward financing policy and institutional responses across the action areas of the Addis Agenda to achieve the SDGs. This section examines the basic building blocks of a digital economy, and the three highlighted areas of finance and development: financial markets, public finance and development pathways.
2. The impact of new digital technologies on economies and societies
2.1.	Which opportunities and challenges do digital technologies create for sustainable development?
Digital technologies can be a key lever for achieving the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and leaving no one behind. Ranging from technologies that have become ubiquitous, such as mobile phones, to frontier technologies like artificial intelligence (AI), they offer the promise of greater access for more people to an ever-widening array of products and services (see box II.1 for an overview of key digital technologies). Some have called digital technologies inherently inclusive due to the unique properties they possess. Furthermore, by enhancing efficiency, digital technologies can also be an enabler for sustained,more sustainable and resilient growth, decarbonization, and resource and energy efficiency. For example, during the COVID-19 outbreak, remote communication technologies enabled the preservation of essential human interactions and thus prevented the complete cessation of economic activity. 
Some changes resulting from digital technologies are gradual and almost imperceptible, while others are sudden and obvious. There are countless examples across all 17 SDGs where digital technologies are already making a difference. In the financial sector, digital technology is being leveraged to facilitate payments, intermediation and risk management, with important implications for the poor and underserved. In public financial management, they help deliver programmes more effectively and reduce leakages. In manufacturing and services, digital technologies are changing the nature of production and work. Their ability to address sustainable development challenges is of course not limitless; digital technologies are not a panacea. Many people remain excluded from the digitalized economy (box II.2 spells out how the terms “digital” and “digitalized” economy will be used in this report). Impacts on the distribution of income and opportunities are highly ambiguous. Furthermore, digital technologies have not led to less resource-intensive growth patterns. Indeed, uncertainty over viable sustainable development pathways abounds. 
     Questions arise across all three dimensions of sustainable development:
• What will be the jobs of the future? What are viable development pathways in the digital era?
• Are we heading for an era of inclusion and opportunity, or will the digital and data divide further increase inequalities and discrimination?
• Will digitalization dematerialize production and reduce our environmental footprint, or will increased energy use caused by digitalization outpace potential energy savings? 
Box II.1
What are the key digital technologies? 
Technological innovation has been the main driver of long-term growth and prosperity over the last 200 years. Transformative general-purpose technologies, such as electricity or the internal combustion engine, have fueled global growth of gross domestic product. Each of these technologies spawned a wealth of innovations that, once economies and societies had fully adjusted, lifted living standards for the vast majority.a 
Digital technologies, which build on the storage and processing of information represented in bits, were first developed after the Second World War. Software and hardware industries have grown rapidly ever since, but for much of the twentieth century, their impact remained limited. It was only with the rise of the Internet in the 1990s, which enabled computer-to-computer communication at low cost, that multiple markets and sectors were impacted, and digital technology became a new, general-purpose technology.b 
Increased connectivity has been a defining feature of digital technological progress over the last three decades. Today, devices and people routinely share enormous amounts of data, leaving rapid, real-time trails of information behind. Building on this ubiquity of digital data and increasing computational power, recent years have seen the emergence of several closely linked digital frontier technologies:c 
• Cloud computing refers to shared pools of hardware comprised of computer networks, servers, data storage and applications software that can be rapidly mobilized through the Internet. Cloud computing minimizes fixed costs for hardware and other complementary investments. Companies using cloud services by third-party providers such as Amazon, Google, Microsoft, IBM, Alibaba and others are billed according to storage space and computer run time. They do not have to shoulder the full costs of acquiring, setting up, and operating hardware and software; 
• The diffusion of smartphones and other Internet connected devices has facilitated aggregation of big data sets that underlies the implementation of digital technologies. With the advent of cloud storage, very large data sets can be conveniently stored, accessed and analysed on a massive scale. Superfast computers can use big data to discern patterns and predict trends, which can aid decision-making in areas ranging from finance to aero-engine maintenance; 
• Artificial Intelligence (AI), which includes machine learning and deep learning, is at the leading edge of digital technology. A new crop of algorithms and the availability of much greater computing power is enabling machines to learn from the examples and experience captured in big data. For example, a deep learning algorithm for a self-driving car must recognize vehicles, pedestrians and cyclists, in all hours of the day and in all weather conditions. With the help of thousands of images, the nested set of algorithms for neural networks conceptualizes the image of a vehicle. Once trained, the network can identify any vehicle with a high degree of probability. The utility of neural networks extends to robo-investment, credit analysis and other areas; 
• With 5G networks, greater interconnection and improved edge computing devices, the Internet of Things (IoT) and the Internet of Manufacturing Things (IoMT) is likely to flourish. AI-enabled computers the size of a credit card are already installed in vehicles, in machinery and infrastructures to monitor conditions, signal problems and trigger a response; 
• Distributed ledger technology (DLT) is a database technology that allows the creation, storage and secure transfer of information. Often referred to as blockchain, this technology stores records of information across distributed computers. DLT can be public (permissionless), in which case all participants have the exact same role, or private (permissioned), where some participants have specific rights, such as the ability to accept new participants or audit the ledger.
aShahid Yusuf, “Development Pathways in the Context of New and Emerging Digital Technologies” (2019). Background paper prepared for this report. 
bAvi Goldfarb and Catherine Tucker, “Digital Economics”, Journal of Economic Literature, vol. 57, Issue 1 (March 2019), pp. 3-43. Available at https://doi.org/10.1257/jel.20171452.
cAdapted from Yusuf. 2019. 

Box II.2 
The digital and digitalized economy: on terminology
Digital technologies impact all sectors of the economy. In line with other recent major United Nations reports, this chapter differentiates between the following:
• The core digital sector, responsible for developing and providing key digital technologies (for example, cloud computing and artificial intelligence); 
• The digital economy, or “that part of economic output derived solely or primarily from digital technologies with a business model based on digital goods or services,”a which includes a broader range of activities that create economic value through the application of these technologies (for example, digital platforms and digital services); and
• The digitalized economy, which describes wider structural implications of digitalization for the economy as a whole.b
aRumana Bukht and Richard Heeks, “Defining, Conceptualising and Measuring the Digital Economy”, ESRC Development Informatics Working Papers Series No. 68 (2017).
bJ. Scott Brennen and Daniel Kreiss, “Digitalization”, The International Encyclopedia of Communication Theory and Philosophy (23 October 2016). 
Figure II.1
Conceptual overview of the digital economy

Source: Bukht & Heeks (2017), UNCTAD (2019).
        2.1.1.	Digital technologies, jobs and growth
Concerns about the digital economy are greatest around jobs. Estimates of future job losses due to automation and AI vary widely, ranging from a low of 5 to 10 per cent to almost half of all existing jobs. So far, the widespread introduction of digital technologies has not led to a rise in unemployment. There is, however, evidence that digital technologies have contributed to greater wage inequality in developed countries, as routine and manual jobs have disappeared, with those affected by job losses forced to accept lower-skilled and lower-paying jobs (e.g., in services industries) (see chapter I on the global context). 
While most analysis of automation focuses on developed countries, developing countries are also affected. Developing countries’ comparative advantage of low-cost labour may erode. Automation could reduce the potential of the manufacturing sector (and some services) to absorb the large number of workers, including youth, that enter the labour force each year. So far, evidence of adverse effects of automation in developing countries is limited, but this may change over time. This raises the question whether traditional development pathways that focus on labour-intensive manufacturing exports are still viable. 
These questions are mirrored in what is sometimes called the “productivity paradox”. On the one hand, the accumulation of ICT capital and digital technologies contributes to global growth of gross domestic product. Mobile broadband penetration and digitalization is essential for regional economic growth in developing countries in particular. On the other hand, expectations of rapid income and productivity growth are not yet matched by hard evidence. This may reflect excessive optimism regarding digital technologies’ transformative potential, or mismeasurement, or merely a time lag until such potential is fully realized. Indeed, historically, major new technologies have taken decades to have measurable effects (see also box I.3 in chapter I). At this point, there is uncertainty over the medium- and long-term growth impacts of digitalization. 
        2.1.2. 	Digital technologies and inclusion 
Because digital technologies provide goods and services at dramatically reduced cost, they have facilitated the inclusion of marginalized and excluded people. Financial inclusion is the most prominent example and signature success story, with fintech playing a key role in the rapid growth of access to financial services globally (see chapter III.G). Yet, the impact of digital technologies on equity is ambiguous. Access to digital technologies remains very uneven. While over three quarters of the world’s population is likely to have access to or own a mobile phone, only half is using the Internet. The gender gap in Internet use is growing in Africa and in least developed countries (see also chapter III.G). 
Digital technologies may also exacerbate inequality and discrimination, as algorithms inherit biases from their human authors, or as AI is developed with data that contains a history of bias and discrimination. Algorithms and AI—ranging from ranking job applications, deciding who qualifies for insurance and more—have serious implications, including on gender equality and women’s empowerment. For example, fintech lenders, informed by algorithmic decision-making, have been found to charge interest rate premiums to minority communities, while advertisements for high-paying jobs are disproportionally targeted at men. Popular voice assistants are commonly coded as female by default. 
Furthermore, access to more advanced production technologies remains highly unequal. Far from making geographical location irrelevant, economic activity related to digital technologies is increasingly concentrated in a few urban areas with good infrastructure and, especially, access to a large pool of highly skilled workers. This contributes to a self-reinforcing mechanism that increases the concentration of opportunity, income and wealth. Geographic concentration of value capture in the digital economy also extends beyond borders: the two largest economies alone, the United States of America and China, account for 97 per cent of market capitalization of platforms valued at more than $1 billion globally (72 and 25 per cent, respectively). 
        2.1.3.	Digital technologies and the environment
Digitalization holds the prospect of dematerialization of production, and thus of more sustainable growth patterns. This is because more services can be provided digitally, and because “smarter” production and distribution systems can enhance efficiencies—for example, with respect to energy use (box II.3). At the same time, digitalization dramatically increases energy use. So far, this demand-effect far outstrips any other effects on sustainability. Digital technologies were responsible for 2.5 per cent of global greenhouse gas emissions in 2013, and this share is predicted to increase to 4 per cent in 2020 and 8 per cent in 2025, mostly due to increases in energy consumption.
Box II.3
Digital technologies and energy use
Digital technologies, and especially new networked and artificial intelligence (AI) applications, are rapidly emerging as important drivers of change in energy systems and for energy demand.a Internet-connected digital technologies and “smarter” energy systems (e.g., smart heating controls) will play an important role in transitioning to a more sustainable and energy efficient economic system. Yet, energy savings may be concentrated, or even outweighed by the high energy use of many digital innovations. For example: 
• The energy footprint of all smart phones per average year of use was 30 per cent larger than that of passenger cars in 2015, and this gap is expected to continue to grow in line with more rapidly increasing numbers of smart phones;b 
• Online video streaming is on the same order of magnitude as air transport in terms of energy use and CO2 emissions (1.0 and 2.5 per cent of global CO2 emissions, respectively). Video streaming on mobile phones is vastly more energy consuming, with 5G expected to further increase overall power consumption;c
• Algorithms rely on vast amounts of data that are stored in data centers. Bottom-up estimates for data centers’ energy use in 2030 range from between a five-fold increase (from 200 to 1,000 TWh) to a fourteen-fold increase to roughly 4,900 TWh.
     Traditional government energy policies, such as electricity market reform and price incentive schemes, are needed to support the development of new services and devices that are energy-efficient or energy-saving. Government-backed, long-term research and development on novel materials, devices and new computing architectures including quantum computing can further help to reduce power consumption of digital technologies and AI systems.d
aRoehrl Richard, “Exploring the impacts of artificial intelligence on the global energy system”, SLP/TFM Research Paper (December 2019). Available at https://sustainabledevelopment.un.org/index.php?page=view&type=12&nr=3335.
bVaclav Smil, Energy and Civilization: A History, (Cambridge, Massachusetts, The MIT Press, November 2018). 
cChris Preist, Daniel Schien and Paul Shabajee, “Evaluating Sustainable Interaction Design of Digital Services: The Case of YouTube”, in Proceedings of CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems Proceedings (Glasgow, Scotland UK, May 2019).
dKlaus Fichter, “E-commerce: sorting out the environmental consequences”, Journal of Industrial Ecology, vol.6, Issue 2 (08 February 2008), pp. 25-41.
     Before analysing financing policy and institutional responses that can help ensure that digital technologies contribute to sustainable finance and achieving the SDGs (section 3), it is first necessary to understand the unique properties that characterize digital technologies. 
2.2.	What are the economic properties of digital technologies?
Digital technology has dramatically reduced the costs of storing, processing and transmitting data. As a result, it has made unprecedented amounts of economically relevant information available to economic agents, such as digital data collected from the footprints of personal, social and business activities on mobile phones, social media and the Internet (see also box II.4 on the data economy). 
Analogous to previous periods of technological change, digital technologies impact economic activity in two broad areas:
• They facilitate a more effective exchange or flow of information, goods and services. Companies have access to relevant economic and financial information, can more easily reach customers, coordinate suppliers, and organize their operations. This is similar in impact to the contributions made by railways, shipping containers, telegrams and similar innovations in the past;
• They increase efficiency and lower the cost in the production of goods and services. Digitalization allows companies to save on raw materials, energy, storage space, time and labour. Information and communications technology, robots and other digital technologies play the same role that the spinning jenny or the steam engine played in previous industrial revolutions. 
2.2.1	Why digital is different
Digital technologies also possess several unique properties that qualitatively change how goods and services are produced and, in some cases, change market structures. They include
• Information, search and transportation costs that are close to zero. Unprecedented amounts of data can be collected because digital activity is easily recorded and activities can be tracked. This can help to overcome information-related market failures—in finance, for example. Searching for information is also cheaper, helping consumers to discover a wider variety of goods and supplies, and firms to access new markets; 
• Digital goods represented in bits can be reproduced at essentially zero cost (economies of scale in economic terms) and can be consumed over and over again (i.e., they are non-rival in consumption). Additional users often increase the value of digital goods for existing users (network effects), which can lead to large firms and greater market concentration. Digital firms can thus grow quickly and obtain large market shares and achieve vast scale without mass. 
Box II.4
The data economya
Digital data has become an increasingly important input for the production of goods and financial and other services. Companies have learned to harvest and extract valuable information from vast amounts of data and turn it into an asset of significant value. 
     The data value chain begins with data collected from individuals and connected devices in the Internet of Things. Aggregators and custodians store and organize the data, making it accessible and marketable. Algorithms analyse and extract useful information. Data presenters then translate the results into insights for their clients. Data giants like Amazon leverage the entire data value chain. They capture data from both consumers and their production chain, organize and analyse the data, and extract insights. 
Figure II.2
The data value chain

Source: UN DESA elaboration, based on Opher and others, 2016.

     The data economy is growing in size; it represents 1.0, 0.8, and 0.5 per cent of gross domestic product (GDP) of the United States of America, Japan and the European Union, respectively. It also generates much larger indirect and secondary economic effects. In the European Union, for example, the total impact of the data market on the region’s economy in 2017 was €336 billion, or 2.4 per cent of total GDP. This is because the data increases the value of upstream industries that can monetize it.
     How value is generated in the data economy has important distributional, privacy, ethical and public policy implications. Data-driven industries are highly concentrated. Access to detailed personal data increasingly allows companies to charge each customer different prices. The collection and use of personal data, designed to influence behavior, also carries with it a potential for abuse. With a few large firms dictating the terms and conditions of data availability and use (as well as capturing the profits), the data economy can further exacerbate income and wealth inequality, and even impact the security and stability of political systems.
aBased on Hoi Wai Jackie Cheng, Marcelo LaFleur and Hamid Rashid, “Data Economy: Radical transformation or dystopia?”, UNDESA Frontier Technologies Quarterly (New York: United Nations Department of Economic and Social Affairs, January 2019). Available at https://www.un.org/development/desa/dpad/wp-content/uploads/sites/45/publication/FTQ_1_Jan_2019.pdf.
2.3.	How do digital technologies affect market structures and business models? 
The properties described above find their reflection in market outcomes. Digital technologies lower production costs and prices. In a digitalized economy, firms might find it easier to access new markets. But this has not always led to more competition. Instead, market concentration is growing in many sectors, particularly in the digital economy itself where global platforms play a dominant role. So how are market structures and business models affected?
First, lower prices are a key benefit of digital technology. For example, in the media industry, most products are now sold in digital format, so that the cost of production and distribution of additional items (the marginal cost) is almost zero. In the financial sector, digital technology can lower the cost of financial services, including credit, and expanding its reach to the previously unbanked. In sectors where goods and services are still delivered physically, key components in the value chain—such as design, marketing, back-office work, or logistics management—can be digitized and provided at reduced cost. Technologies such as AI facilitate analysis of vast amounts of data and solve increasingly complex problems. As a result, a growing number of tasks previously performed by humans can be automated. This includes increasingly non-routine and cognitive tasks that were once long beyond the remit of machines. 
Second, digitalization technologies can lower entry barriers and present opportunities for firms, including those in developing countries, to access larger markets. The Internet, cloud-based computing, and open software drastically reduce the need for major investments in software and services. Even cutting-edge technologies such as AI can now be rented by firms in both developed and developing countries by the hour through cloud-based computing platforms. In many sectors, the main non-labour costs of a start-up are a laptop computer and an Internet connection, together with cloud-based computing services and/or a 3D printer. Digital technologies’ impact reaches beyond the core digital economy: by reducing export costs for micro, small and medium-sized enterprises (MSMEs) in developing countries, the Internet has expanded their access to global markets. Cheap reproduction and easier search and matching of actors mean that geographic boundaries become much less relevant.
Third, online platforms have emerged as important new forms of intermediation. Platform-centred businesses have a major advantage in the data-driven economy. They can record and extract all data related to online actions and interactions among their users. This data can then be monetized, for example, by selling targeted online advertising, operating e-commerce platforms, renting out cloud services, or allowing consumers and/or firms to share their underutilized assets (the sharing economy). Thanks to network effects (a product or service gains additional value as more people use it), online platforms can grow and gain market share very quickly.
Seven of the world’s top eight companies by market capitalization use platform-based business models. Google has about 90 per cent of the global market for Internet searches. Facebook accounts for two thirds of the global social media market. Amazon boasts an almost 40 per cent share of the world’s online retail activity. In China, Alibaba has been estimated to have close to 60 per cent of the Chinese e-commerce market. WeChat (owned by Tencent) has more than one billion active users and, together with Alipay (Alibaba), its payment solution has captured virtually the entire Chinese market for digital payments. Such platforms can eliminate intermediaries and rent-seekers, enhancing market efficiencies. At the same time, global digital platforms have taken steps to consolidate their competitive positions, which may end up slowing down economic dynamism and precluding developing-country platforms from reaching competitive scale. 
Fourth, market concentration is growing across industries and countries, despite lower entry barriers. “Winner take most” mechanisms have become more common even beyond the core digital economy, and digital technologies are partly responsible. A small number of so-called superstar firms have increased their productivity (and profits), as increasingly complex technologies require evermore sophisticated complementary investments and highly specialized skills in the workforce, while the majority of firms, even in the same industry, have lagged behind. 
3. Sustainable financing and development policies for a digital era 
Changing business models and market structures demand a comprehensive rethink of financing and development policy and regulatory approaches. Digital technologies 
• Affect all parts of society and economy, hence any policy responses need to be mindful of their impacts across traditional industry boundaries, policy domains and on various stakeholders;
• Are complex and highly technical, so that no one actor is likely to have sufficient knowledge and information to make informed decisions;
• Are evolving rapidly, so that experiences with new technologies are often limited and uncertainty over future developments is high. 
For this reason, countries should take a strategic, whole-of-society approach, which engages all relevant stakeholders, and can solicit relevant information, raise awareness and provide a common frame of reference for all actors. This is reflected in the Addis Agenda, where Member States committed to “adopt science, technology and innovation strategies as integral elements of our national sustainable development strategies”. In practice, these strategic responses can take different forms—as part of an STI strategy or STI road maps, a dedicated digital economy strategy, or through the explicit integration of digital technologies in broader planning processes (e.g., embedded in a country’s integrated national financing framework). 
The concrete elements of these strategies will vary depending on each individual country’s stage of development and its respective involvement in the creation and use of digital technologies. Since technological change is a key source of growth and sustainable development, all countries need to exploit its potential while being mindful of any possible negative externalities. This requires, before all else, investment in the basic building blocks that enable participation in the digital economy.
Putting basic building blocks in place: investing in infrastructure and skills to be digital-ready (Addis Agenda action area G, on science, technology, innovation and capacity-building, and data)
The basic building blocks of a digital economy—infrastructure, Internet access, digital skills and regulatory and data policies—ensure that individuals and firms are connected to and can function in the digital world. But providing access alone is not enough to (a) address new opportunities and risks in financial markets, (b) respond to new challenges and opportunities in public finance, and (c) chart viable development pathways. The remainder of the chapter will look at policy and institutional responses across the action areas of the Addis Agenda, clustered in three broad financing areas: 
(i) The financial sector How is fintech changing financial markets across payments, savings and credit, and risk management? Will fintech make access to financial services more or less equitable? What are the challenges, such as to financial stability, and what are the policy options? (Addis Agenda action areas B, on private business and finance; E on debt and debt sustainability; and F on systemic issues);
(ii) Public finance How can policymakers use digital technologies to enhance public financial management efficiency and combat illicit financial flows, while adapting tax and expenditure policies to a digitalizing economy? (Addis Agenda action area A); and 
(iii) Development pathways How is the developmental model changing? What investment, trade and technology policy options exist to find development pathways in the context of digitalization? (Addis Agenda action areas B, on private finance and investment, C on international development cooperation, D on trade, and G on science, technology, innovation and capacity building).


Figure II.3
Financing policy responses to the digital revolution: a strategic approach


Source: UN DESA.